3S8G-CF70-000B-Y27T


The New York Times


Economic Scene;What Agenda In Emergency?


19801224T000000Z


SHOULD President-elect Ronald Reagan declare a national economic emergency when he takes office? James A. Baker 3d, Mr. Reagan's designated chief of the White House staff, has said that the President-elect was seriously considering doing just that. But G.  William Miller, Secretary of the Treasury in the Carter Administration, and Charles L. Schultze, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, have declared that there is no economic emergency and warned that talk of a crisis by Mr. Reagan's aides could create one.
 
 Yesterday Edwin Meese 3d, chairman of the Reagan transition team, reinforced the President-elect's intention to give immediate attention to the ''very serious'' state of the economy, although he said that Mr. Reagan did not intend to declare ''an economic emergency as some kind of legal entity.''
 
 Mr. Reagan's ''supply-side'' economic advisers, who favor drastic tax and expenditure cuts to cure stagflation, accuse Mr. Carter's aides of simply trying to defend their own record and their own failed policies, much as Herbert Hoover's supporters attacked Franklin D. Roosevelt's emergency actions as a threat to the freeenterprise system.
 
 But Secretary Miller and Mr. Schultze are not alone in worrying that the declaration of a national emergency might lead to an alarmed public reaction at home and abroad. Indeed, Donald T. Regan, Mr.  Reagan's choice for Secretary of the Treasury, told reporters he did not think the new administration should declare an emergency, because ''it raises fears of things that I don't think we're in yet.''
 
 Is the United States actually in an economic emergency? There is no objective answer to that question. To the unemployed auto worker in Detroit - or the Chrysler executive - an emergency clearly exists. In saying he would be happy to meet with Douglas A. Fraser, president of the United Automobile Workers, Mr. Reagan has signaled his desire to give immediate attention to a major trouble spot. There are others - steel, housing and other sectors highly sensitive to high interest rates.
 
 But Mr. Reagan is still trying to make up his mind whether to call a broader economic conference soon after his inauguration. ''I've been thinking about that one,'' he told reporters. ''I haven't made any schedule on it yet.''
 
 Much of the American economy, especially in the Sun Belt, appears to be in little or no trouble at all. Oil, natural gas, coal and other energy sources are booming along, with the help of climbing prices stemming from the war in the Middle East, threats of shortages to come and the likelihood that members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries will again exploit their quasimonopoly.
 
 Despite the effort of the Federal Reserve Board to bring down the rate of growth of the monetary aggregates, much of the country still seems flush with money and credit. Wristwatches costing $10,000 are going like hot cakes, even if hot cakes are moving slowly for breadwinners, whose real incomes have fallen to their lowest level in more than a decade, as prices of food and other items important to a moderate-income budget have in general outpaced the climb in wage rates.
 
 The case for declaring a national emergency exists, even if less obvious and acute than the one that greeted Franklin Delano Roosevelt in 1933, with nearly one-fourth of the labor force unemployed and thousands of banks threatened with collapse. It rests primarily on public alarm over inflation and high interest rates, and the fear that these are undermining the vitality of the American economy.
 
 This week the prime interest rate appeared to have peaked, but there is concern that interest rates may be facing another rollercoaster ride when the economy recovers again.
 
 However, there is also anxiety, not only in conservative circles but among many liberals and middle-of-the-roaders, that the sort of fiscal stimulus, including a sharp increase in defense expenditures, long championed by President-elect Reagan, will in fact exacerbate the inflation and bring on a major currency crisis.
 
 The crucial question facing the Reagan administration in deciding whether or not to declare a national economic emergency is whether Mr. Reagan knows precisely what he intends to do - what legislation he wants Congress to enact promptly and what emergency actions he wants to take. If he were to declare an emergency without a specific and immediate program to attack it, he could indeed weaken public confidence in his administration and create cynicism that one more propaganda balloon had sailed forth and burst.
 
 There is another danger in declaring a national emergency that the Reagan Administration might as well face now: If inflation is the focal point of the public's anxiety, as poll after poll, before and since the Presidential election, has shown, then the public is likely to demand the one remedy initially most popular among men and women in the street - compulsory wage and price controls. This course would be anathema to Mr. Reagan and his free-enterprise supporters. Direct controls would also be opposed by the large majority of both conservative and liberal economists as, in the words of Gardner Ackley, professor of economics at the University of Michigan and former chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers under President Johnson, ''far too costly in economic, administrative, political and moral terms.''
 
 So, unless Mr. Reagan wants to risk public disillusion or be forced into controls he does not want, he had better have a firm and clear program worked out before he declares a national economic emergency.


ECONOMIC POLICY (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (90%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (89%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (89%); AUTOMOTIVE WORKERS (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); NATURAL GAS (73%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (62%); UNEMPLOYED PERSONS (62%); CENTRAL BANKS (60%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (60%); INTEREST RATES (50%); EXPORT TRADE (50%); 
