3S8G-CGJ0-000B-Y0MS


The New York Times


FED NEED REINFORCEMENTS IN ITS WAR ON INFLATION;WASHINGTON


19801214T000000Z


THE Federal Reserve's ever-tightening grip on the nation's monetary valves is a signal that the central bank is determined to squeeze the worst of inflation out of the economy - even if it produces a haircurling recession next year. But as interest rates soar back into the rarefied strata, cries of pain are becoming more shrill, outbursts of wrath more pronounced.
 
 ''Madness'' was how Chrysler chairman Lee A. Iococca characterized recent Fed policies. His beleaguered No. 3 car company - which just announced that the latest sales slumps mean it will be halting production ne xt month of K cars, on which it had been pinning comeback hope s - last week was said to be asking its employees and suppliers for wage and price freezes to help persuade Washington to give it the a dditional loan guarantees it wants. Equally irate is Michael Sumic hrast, chief economist of the National Association of Home Builders . ''I am very upset about the way the Fed has been messing with money rates,'' he says. Mr. Sumichrast says that the Federal Reser ve is ''to blame for the roller coaster (in interst rates) over t he past 13 to 14 months.''
 
 Part o f the question is: How should monetar y policy be judged? If it's on the basis of fairly modest and predic table growth rates of the money supply and fairly modest and predic table changes in interest rates, then the Fed policies have be en a failure. Mortgages were 17 percent in April, down to 12 1/2 perc ent in June and are backup again in the 16-17 percent range. The prim e rate that banks charge on loans to their best corporate custo mers fell from a record 20 percent in April to 10 3/4 percent in June ; last week, it was backat 20 percent again, with the momentum clearl y still upward. In the past six months, growth in the money supply, as measured by the most widely used gauge, is running at double the F ed's target range.
 
 The rest of the question is: Who is at fault? The Federal Reserve, its partisans say, is alone at the firing line against inflation, and therefore is drawing all the fire. Paul A. Volcker, the Fed chairman, and many private economists, including some advisers of Presidentelect Reagan, insist that errant fiscal policy should take a substantial part of the blame. They point not only to the extent to which the Federal Government has been spending beyond its means but to Washington's less-often-remarked-on off-budget borrowing, which doesn't even show up in the Government's total deficit, through the Federal Financing Bank.
 
 ''The total private savings pre-empted by Federal programs has become so outsized as to make implementation of monetary policy very difficult,'' says Alan Greenspan, President Ford's chief economist and a key adviser to Mr. Reagan. Last week Mr. Greenspan's recent remark that the Fed ''has no choice but to do what it is doing'' found a significant echo.
 
 Donald T. Regan, named as Mr. Reagan's choice as Secretary of the Treasury, said: ''Well, the Federal Reserve is tightening money.  That's the price we have to pay for the inflation that this country finds itself in. It's the only game in town - it's the only way that inflation can be stopped at the current moment. When this administration takes over we'll have a new economic policy with which we'll deal with inflation in several ways at once rather than just one way.''
 
 Whether the Reagan administration will be able to give the Fed the support troops it ''desperately'' needs (to quote Fed vice chairman Frederick Shultz)'' in the inflation fight is still unknown. In recent years there has been much political talk. But the political support needed to cut the growth of Government spending substantially has been lacking. At the same time, borrowing by consumers and businesses has strained the financial sector and that in turn has strained the Fed's ability to manage monetary growth.
 
 A look at the last few months makes the dimensions of the problem painfully clear. As a part of what Washington economist Michael K.  Evans calls the''buy-it-now-because-it-will-cost-more-later syndrome,'' the percentage of disposable income that the public saves has declined from 5.2 percent to 4.8 percent since May.
 
 And, in the past four months, in spite of lackluster capital spending, a partial recovery in profits and declines in investment in inventories, business loans have increased at an annual 18 percent rate. The Federal deficit projection for the current fiscal year is still subject to wide variations. But it is currently at least $45 billion, and for the year ended Sept. 30, it came in at $59 billion.  Under such public and private pressure for credit, the money supply has inevitably ballooned.
 
 Like the central bank chairman, many Reagan advisers are also of the monetarist persuasion. That is, they believe that inflation will wither and die if the growth in the money supply over the long term matches the growth of the economy. So, initially at least, the incoming administration is unlikely to lean too hard on Mr. Volcker.  Judging from pronouncements about dramatic new efforts under way to cut nondefense spending, Mr. Reagan's team may even, if it can get Congress to go along, provide the ''coherent and mutually reinforcing'' support that Mr. Volcker has so long called for.
 
 But at what price? There seems little doubt that the auto and housing sectors will take it on the chin. The old adage in auto showrooms goes, ''If you can't finance 'em, you can't sell 'em.'' It now costs about $170 a month more than a year ago to service a typical mortgage and upward of $25 a month for a car loan. And if it takes a recessionary relapse to squeeze inflation out of the system, Reagan advisers would presumably prefer to have it come quickly so that an improvement could be under way in the early Reagan years. What many R eagan advisers would like to see also, however, is far more modest a nd predictable growth in the money supply and less wrenching cha nges in interest rates. That is where potential conflictwith Mr. Volc ker, and between Reagan advisers, might come. If the central bank now tries to stabilize interest rates by providing as much money as the economy needs to prevent further increases, in the words of Mr.  Greenspan, that could ''unleash a degree of liquidity that would bl ow the economy out of the water.''
 
 And in fact, prior to Oct. 6, 1979, the Fed had put the accent on stable interest rates, letting the money supply run wild. A massive run on the do llar in the fall of 1979 led to the ''Saturday night special'' - new tough interest rates and even tually credit controls - in short, an experiment with monetarism tha t had long been urged but never tried. Judging from the vehemence o f inflation and the volatility of interest rates, the experiment has not been a success. But given the circumstances, could even a per fect Federal Reserve Board and a perfect chairman have whipped thi ngs into shape singlehandedly?


ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); CENTRAL BANKS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); INTEREST RATES (89%); BANKING & FINANCE (89%); MONEY SUPPLY (89%); ECONOMIC POLICY (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); RECESSION (77%); PUBLIC FINANCE (77%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); 
