3S8G-CGH0-000B-Y0K4


The New York Times


PROSPECTS


19801214T000000Z


OPEC's Bali Decision A month ago , economists and politicians viewed this week's OPEC meeting in Ba li with a sense of foreboding. Increased activity in thespot market a nd warfare between Iran and Iraq seemed to heighten the likelihood of growing shortfalls - and a substantial price rise. Thatsituation has yet not come to pass. World stocks remain high.  Consequently, a price rise of about 10 percent - less than the current infla tion rate -looks probable. The big influence is still Saudi Arabia, which has raised production to over 10 million barrels a day to redr ess the shortages caused by the latest Middle East war. In itself, th e increase in Saudi production would not be enough to justify the s anguine attitude many observers seem to share about the Bali meeting.  But exports from Iraq have resumed, and may soon reach 850,000 barre ls a day, roughly one-third of prewar levels. Continued weak demand i n consuming countries has also been a help.
 
 Nevertheless, the war continues. Iran, which has also resumed modest production, could still attack Iraqi fields. And abnormally cold weather in Europe and the United States could persist, jacking up demand.
 
 Accountants Rewrite Rules
 
 Change generally comes slowly in the complex world of accounting.  But major American multinationals are demanding that a controversial rule governing how foreign currency gains and losses show up in company earnings reports be altered.
 
 Proposed amendments to Financial Accounting Standards Board rule No. 8 will be discussed this week at a public hearing in New York by corporate treasurers and members of the F.A.S.B.
 
 Both groups are after the same result - to deal with the problem of fluctuating overseas earnings, determined in large part by shifts in exchange rates. Companies feel the current rule makes quarterly statements more reflective of accounting quirks than actual corporate performance, leading to misimpressions in the investment community.
 
 Experts in international finance generally prefer a revised F.A.S.B. ruling that would temper sharp quarterly fluctuations.  However, as long as floating rates, a diverse set of international accounting systems and wildly disparate rates of inflation exist, toting up -and guarding against - unforeseen gains or losses will remain a Herculean task.Making Spirits Bright
 
 'Tis the season to be jolly. Wine and liquor stores, which traditionally rely on the holiday season for nearly one-quarter of total sales, are expected to hold their own despite this year's generally depressing economic news.
 
 Thanks to rising rates of production and increased value added per employee, price increases for both liquor and wine have been substantially below the overall rate of inflation.
 
 In spite of liquor's superior price performance, shifting consumer tastes, lower consumption patterns and the high accep tance of wine for gift-giving suggest wine sales will grow at a faster rate than spirits. However, the effects of deregulation in New York and New Jersey, which triggered an early rush on stor es, may cut in to local sales somewhat during the rest of December. E ven good things have their limits.Environmentalists Persist
 
 In spite of a well-documented aversion to Federal, state and local regulations in general, public attitudes about the importance of environmental quality remain strong.
 
 According to an Opinion Research Corporation poll conducted for a number of private business clients, over 60 percent of those polled agreed that ''cleaning the environment is important, even if it means closing down some old plants and causing some unemployment.''
 
 Forty-two percent of those responding to a Resources for the Future survey (conducted for the Council on Environmental Quality) said protecting the environment was so important ''that requirements and standards can't be too high and continuing improvement must be made regardless of cost.'' Only 13 percent felt pollution control requirements and standards had gone too far, and already cost more than they are worth.
 
 Apparently, business efforts to depict such regulations as uneconomic and needlessly burdensome will face public opposition.


TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); PRICE INCREASES (89%); INFLATION (89%); ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (87%); COMPANY EARNINGS (86%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (79%); SALES PROJECTIONS (78%); CONSUMPTION (77%); ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE INDUSTRY (77%); BEVERAGE PRICES (77%); CONSUMER BEHAVIOR (77%); BANKING & FINANCE REGULATION (76%); ANNUAL FINANCIAL RESULTS (76%); EXCHANGE RATES (76%); DEREGULATION (72%); WAR & CONFLICT (72%); ACCOUNTING (71%); ACCOUNTING STANDARDS (71%); CURRENCIES (71%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (69%); BEVERAGE SALES & REVENUES (69%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (65%); BEER WINE & LIQUOR STORES (65%); HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (60%); 
