3S8G-CJY0-000B-Y1MF


The New York Times


PONDEROSA LOOKS TO SUN BELT


19801127T000000Z


Ponderosa System Inc., the parent of the Ponderosa steakhouses, is reaching toward the Sun Belt to offset the pressure on earnings it suffered this year from a combination of poorly situated units, an unfriendly takeover struggle and the recession.
 
 Despite those troubles, analysts say the chain is better prepared to weather this downturn than it was during the 1974-75 recession.  Ponderosa's earnings plunged 72.3 percent in the six months ended Aug. 14, to $2.6 million, from $9.4 million last year. Sales dipped to $154.8 million, from $158.9 million.
 
 The company's main problem, analysts say, is that Ponderosa's 695 steakhouses are concentrated in the layoff-plagued Middle Wes t.  ''I don't think there is anything wrong wit h the Ponderosa concept, except that their restaurants are al l in the wrong place,'' said Michael Culp, an analyst with E.F. Hutto n & Company. ''You can'tput them on piggyback trailers and move them to San Antonio.'' Situated in Hard-Hit States
 
 Gerald S. Office, chairman and chief executive officer, conceded that half of Ponderosa's 695 restaurants were in Ohio, Michigan and Pennsylvania, states that have been particularly hard hit by the recession and where unemployment is high.
 
 To offset this concentration in the industrial belt, Ponderosa plans to open 200 to 300 new outlets in the next five years in the Sun Belt and other markets less vulnerable to recession, Mr. Office said. The company also plans to open its first overseas franchise next year, he added.
 
 Compounding the company's problems was an apparent takeover attempt this spring by the General Host Corporation of Stamford, Conn.  Ponderosa subsequently spent $7.3 million to purchase 430,600 shares of its common stock, or 9.4 percent of the total outstanding, from General Host. It also sued General Host, charging it with attempting an illegal takeover. Fighting Spirit
 
 Some securities analysts say Ponderosa's fighting spirit should ward off any other acquisition-minded companies. But others contend that Ponderosa is more vulnerable than ever, having spent millions of dollars to fend off General Host.
 
 ''My guess is, if this happens again, it's b ye-bye Ponderosa,'' said Geoffrey Stein of McDonald & Company in Cleveland, noting that Ponderosa's m anagement owns less than 3 percent of the company's common stock.
 
 Yet Mr. Culp and other analysts say the company is better positioned now than in the past. They credit internal improvements in the last five years, such as a broader menu, more appealing restaurant interiors and an on-line computer system that has improved Ponderosa's cash management and cost controls.
 
 Ponderosa is also trying to grab a bigger share of the existing market by fine-tuning its menu, adding choice beefsteaks and alcoholic beverages at some units. Seafood Introduced
 
 In recent years, it has introduced seafood entrees and salad bars to its menu. The company has also added sandwiches to build traffic during lunch hours, as well as a children's menu to increase family trade during dinner hours.
 
 Ponderosa is experimenting with alcoholic beverages at restaurants in Tipp City, Ohio, and in Houston, and will probably introduce beer and wine in other Ponderosa steakhouses as well. But Mr. Office said that the introduction of alcoholic beverages would not be a chainwide undertaking.
 
 If the company introduced alcohol throughout its chain, ''they would catch a little flak from people who think a family restaurant shouldn't sell alcohol,'' said John Hoffman, an analyst with Smith Barney, Harris Upham and Company. Slump Duration a Factor
 
 The duration of Ponderosa's earnings decline depends upon the duration of the nation's economic slump, analysts said.
 
 Their predictions of Ponderosa's fiscal year 1981 earnings range from $3.4 million to $8 million, compared with $13.5 million in the 1980 fiscal year, which would represent a decline of about 40 to 74 percent.
 
 Mr. Culp expects Ponderosa to earn $6.9 million this year, and about $11.3


BARS AND RESTAURANTS; COMPANY AND ORGANIZATION PROFILES  ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); PARENT COMPANIES (90%); RECESSION (90%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (90%); RESTAURANTS (90%); COMMON STOCK (89%); TAKEOVERS (89%); COMPANY EARNINGS (89%); RESTAURANT FOOD & BEVERAGE SALES (78%); EXECUTIVES (66%); SUITS & CLAIMS (64%); DRINKING PLACES (60%); 
