3S8G-CHT0-000B-Y3XC


The New York Times


Your Money;Where to Save On Loan Rates


19801206T000000Z


WITH the removal last month of the New York State usury ceiling on consumer loans, and the almost immediate rate increases charged by some banks, is there any place else where consumers can borrow at lower cost?
 
 Yes, but not for long, and the savings may not be all that great.  For people who have ordinary life insurance policies, one option is to borrow against the cash value of those policies at rates that range from 4 to 8 percent. But life insurance regulators yesterday endorsed a proposal that would abolish the maximum 8 percent borrowing rate and replace it with a floating rate that would be significantly higher.
 
 Another option is to borrow from credit unions, which traditionally have offered somewhat lower loan rates than commercial banks and personal finance companies. On Wednesday, however, the National Credit Union Association raised the interest ceiling on loans that federally chartered credit unions make to their members to 21 percent from 15 percent, effective immediately.
 
 The higher rate ceiling, designed as a temporary relief mea sure to help credit unions cope with volatile money m arkets, will remain in effect for nine months. After that, the assoc iation's staff will issue a proposal regarding the possibility of establishing a floatingrate ceiling.
 
 The top interest rate for federally chartered credit unions now exceeds the new consumer loan rates that went into effect at several major New York City banks earlier this week. Although New York lenders, including state-chartered credit unions, are still subject to the state's criminal usury ceiling of 25 percent, the large banks did not raise their rates to the maximum allowed under the new law.  Citibank, the Chemical Bank, the Irving Trust Bank and the Marine Midland Bank, for example, posted borrowing rates that ranged from 17 to 19 percent, up from the former maximums of 12 to 13 1/2 percent.
 
 Officials of the National Credit Union Association said they did not expect most Federal credit unions to increase their rates immediately, except in some large metropolitan areas where their costs of obtaining lendable funds are relatively high.
 
 ''Our feeling is that most credit unions will not be moving directly to higher rates,'' said Randall Miller, acting director of research for the association. ''I fully anticipate they'll be nowhere near 21 percent.''
 
 Mr. Miller said he expected that rates for unsecured personal loans would settle at ''18 percent or below'' and that rates for new-car loans would hover around ''14, 15 or 16 percent.'' But he noted that since many banks were now charging up to 22 percent on credit cards, credit union rates for open-end, or revolving, credit in some areas might rise to the 21 percent ceiling.
 
 Berris Gordon, managing director of the New York State Credit Union League, said it was too early to tell what action credit unions in the state might take. ''I doubt that any credit union would go above 18 percent,'' he added. ''I just talked with the manager of one credit union which is at 15 percent, and he told me that he planned to stay at 15 percent.''
 
 People who are in an enviable position, as far as consumer loans are concerned, are those who have ordinary life policies with a significant c ash value that they can borrow against. On new policies,the maximum l oan rate is 8 percent, while the rate can dip as low as 4 or 5 percen t on policies issued decades ago.
 
 But it can take several years for a policy to accumulate a cash value of any magnitude. With a typical $50,000 policy purchased by a 35-year-old man, for example, the cash value would be zero in the first year, $650 in the second and $1,350 in the third.
 
 Furthermore, borrowing against the cash value of a policy reduces the amount of death benefits available should the borrower die before the loan is repaid. One way to avoid this problem is to exercise the ''fifth dividend option.'' It allows policyholders to use the dividends paid by their insurance company to buy term insurance equal to the cash value of the policy.
 
 Despite its drawbacks, the life insurance policy loan is proving very popular. According to the National Council of Life Insurance, policy loans for September totaled $40.26 billion, or 8.7 percent of the industry's assets. The last time the figure, which averaged 8.1 percent during 1979, went as high was during the credit squeeze of 1974.
 
 The attractiveness of policy loans troubles the life insurance industry, which is concerned about the impact it could have on company liquidity. The industry enthusiastically supports the model regulation adopted yesterday by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners. It would replace the 8 percent borrowing rate with a floating rate tied to a corporate bond index that now stands at 13.35 percent. Before the regulation takes effect, however, it must be enacted on a state-by-state basis.


INTEREST RATES (92%); ECONOMIC NEWS (92%); CREDIT UNIONS (92%); INSURANCE PREMIUMS (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); FRIENDLY & PROVIDENT SOCIETIES (90%); CONSUMER LENDING (90%); PERSONAL FINANCE (90%); COMMERCIAL BANKING (89%); INSURANCE RATE REGULATION (89%); BANKING & FINANCE ASSOCIATIONS (89%); INSURANCE COMMISSIONS (78%); LIFE INSURANCE (76%); INSURANCE POLICIES (76%); INSURANCE REGULATORY BODIES (71%); INSURANCE (71%); INSURANCE REGULATION & POLICY (71%); CREDIT CARDS (70%); CITIES (65%); 
