3S8G-CF60-000B-Y22P


The New York Times


ABOUT REAL ESTATE;MERRILL LYNCH EXPANDS PROPERTY SERVICES


19801224T000000Z


Merrill Lynch & Company, the Wall Street concern that more than 10 years ago decided there was money to be made in real estate operations, is clinging to that assumption despite the soaring interest rates that have shaken much of the housing industry.
 
 Yesterday, Merrill Lynch announced that it had acquired for an undisclosed price Colquitt-Carruthers, a 26-office realty company serving Washington, D.C., Maryland and northern Virginia.
 
 In fact, a Merrill Lynch spokesman said that the company expected real estate activities to be the fastest-growing of its businesses and was predicting that within five years earnings would be evenly divided between its stock brokerage business and real estate and other financial services. Merrill Lynch's subsidiaries include Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith, the nation's largest securities firm.
 
 Although Merrill Lynch & Company did not break out its earnings for the latest fiscal quarter, it did concede that ''a high level of interest rates continued to adversely affect our real-estate-related activities.'' Over all, the company reported an increase in earnings of 33.8 percent for the three months ended Sept. 26.
 
 ''We look upon the real estate industry now in much the shape the securities industry was in in the 40's,'' a spokesman said. ''What we did for the securities business, we expect to do in the real estate business.''
 
 Merrill Lynch & Company, through its umbrella Merrill Lynch Diversified Financial Services Group, began its formal foray into financial services activities in 1976.
 
 Merrill Lynch Realty Associates Inc., the residential real estate entity, was formed in 1978. No other Wall Street brokerage firm is currently involved in the retail real estate brokerage and real estate management industries.
 
 The subsidiary has purchased at least an 80 percent interest in real estate firms in Dallas; Pittsburgh; Baltimore; Hartford; Northport, L.I.; Charlotte, N.C.; Tulsa, Okla.; Phoenix-Tucson; Milwaukee, and Mission Hills in California's San Fernando Valley. It has not bought the real estate agencies outright because Merrill Lynch feels that if some equity is maintained by the firms their interest in the operations will not flag.
 
 Locally, Merrill Lynch last spring acquired certain assets of Burr Real Estate Inc., the largest real estate firm in Long Island with 16 offices in Suffolk and Nassau counties.
 
 One of the advantages is the depth of financial expertise Merrill Lynch brings to the realty business, a real estate industry spokesman explained yesterday. He remarked that potential home buyers who find it difficult to obtain mortgage money through conventional channels may find it easier in certain situations to obtain money through a Merrill Lynch broker.
 
 For example, he said, during the past year, when mortgage money was from time to time unavailable in many markets, Merrill Lynch helped buyers obtain funds from alternative sources. Another advantage, he added, is that Merrill Lynch has a national mortgage officer whose responsibility is finding favorable mortgage situations around the country and alerting Merrill Lynch brokers.
 
 ''We have about 4,000 salespeople operating in about 170 sales offices throughout the country,'' said Jon W. Greenleaf, senior vice president-marketing for Merrill Lynch Realty Associates. ''We've held on to management in almost all cases.''
 
 He added, ''We are seeking to build a national network of leading real estate firms throughout the country which will be branded with the Merrill Lynch name, and also are trying to raise the level of professionalism in the residential real estate business.''
 
 A related operation is Merrill Lynch Relocation Management. A third-party service firm, it is hired by corporate clients to help its employees relocate. The subsidiary helps the individual employee sell his house and in many cases to find a new home as well, and can also help arrange transportation and orientation for arrival in the new community.
 
 Another real estate arm in the financial services group is Merrill Lynch Hubbard, which provides financing for commercial properties. A fourth entity is Merrill Lynch Huntoon Paige Inc., the mortgagefinancing intermediary between buyer and seller.


REAL ESTATE (97%); COMPANY EARNINGS (90%); INTEREST RATES (89%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (89%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (89%); BANKING & FINANCE (89%); OFFICE PROPERTY (78%); ANNUAL FINANCIAL RESULTS (78%); COMPANY LISTS & RANKINGS (78%); PROPERTY MANAGEMENT (78%); SECURITIES BROKERS (77%); FINANCIAL RESULTS (75%); RETAIL PROPERTY (73%); 
