3S8G-CJS0-000B-Y15G


The New York Times


CREDIT MARKETS;Fed Loans Rise Above $2.2 Billion;Increase Is Seen In Discount Rate


19801129T000000Z


Borrowings from the Federal Reserve System broke through the $2 billion mark in the financial week that ended Wednesday, the central bank reported yesterday.
 
 This caused some participants in the money markets to predict that the Federal Reserve, which increased its discount rate on Nov. 16, less than two weeks ago, might do so again in early December. The discount rate is what the Federal Reserve charges on loans it makes to financial institutions.
 
 During the week that ended Wednesday, daily average borrowings rose $236 million, to total $2.215 billion. Bankers attributed the strong demand for loans from the central bank to the widening difference between the discount rate and the rate on Federal funds - overnight money that banks trade among themselves.
 
 Yesterday, for example, one bank reported that Federal funds had been traded at an annual interest rate as high as 24 percent, and that the prevalent rate during the day had been about 20 percent.  The Federal Reserve's discount rate, however, is only 12 percent plus a two-percentage-point penalty for large banks that borrow frequently from the Fed. A Bargain Even With Penalty
 
 Thus, even if a bank were willing to pay the penalty, borrowing from the central bank would still represent a substantial bargain compared with the cost of Federal funds.
 
 Because the Federal Reserve, which regulates banks as well as the money supply, frowns upon bank borrowings from its discount window, banks usually are willing to pay a premium to obtain reserves from the Federal funds market. But when the disparity between the Federal funds rate and the discount rate exceeds a percentage point, more and more banks are willing to endure the displeasure of their regulator.
 
 The average Federal funds rate for the week ended Wednesday, according to the Fed, was 17.43 percent, more than two percentage points above what it had been only a week earlier.
 
 In response to the high rates on Federal funds, five leading New York banks announced increases in their broker-loan rates yesterday, to 18 1/2 percent from 17 3/4 percent. These overnight loans are used by securities dealers to finance their customers' margin accounts. The banks that announced the increases were the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company, the Chase Manhattan Bank, the Chemical Bank, Citibank and the Bank of New York. Business Loans Up
 
 The Federal Reserve also announced that business loans at the nation's larger banks rose by $244 million during the week ended Nov. 19, which some bankers described as a ''moderate'' increase. In New York, these loans declined by $133 million.
 
 On a seasonally adjusted basis, however, the growth in business loans was somewhat stronger, according to Jay N. Woodworth, vice president of the Bankers Trust Company. If seasonal factors were taken into consideration, the nationwide rise in business borrowing would have amounted to about $933 million, Mr. Woodworth said.
 
 Strong corporate loan demand from banks over the past few months has been cited by bankers and economists as a reason behind the recent sharp rise in interest rates. Interest rates, which represent the cost of credit, tend to rise with demand for credit, the economists say.
 
 Mr. Woodworth said that the recent increases in business borrowing from banks, which over the past three months has risen at an annual rate of about 27 percent, is a misleading indicator of overall business loan demand.
 
 Banks have been aggressively cutting rates to attract companies that had been borrowing in the commercial paper market, where corporations lend and borrow directly among themselves. According to yesterday's Fed report, borrowings by nonfinancial companies in the commercial paper market dropped by $99 million in the week ended Nov. 19.
 
 If borrowing in the commercial-paper market were combined with borrowing from banks, the annual rate of incr ease in business borrowings would be only 14 percent over the last three months, Mr.  Woodworth said.


BANKS AND BA; KING; CREDIT; ECONOMIC CON; ITIONS (US); INTEREST (MONEY)  US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); INTEREST RATES (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); CENTRAL BANKS (90%); COMMERCIAL BANKING (89%); US FEDERAL FUNDS RATES (89%); COMMERCIAL LENDING (89%); CORPORATE DEBT (79%); MONEY SUPPLY (73%); 
