3S8G-CFK0-000B-Y350


The New York Times


REAGAN IS PROBUSINESS, BUT READ THE FINE PRINT


19801221T000000Z


From corporate chieftain to corner shopkeeper, the United States business community seems to view the aproaching Presidency of Ronald Reagan as an unalloyed blessing. The reason for the prevailing sentiment is no mystery; Mr. Reagan has promised to be a free market, anti-Big Government, get-tough-with-the-Russians chief executive.
 
 His style, as well as his philosophy, inspires confidence in most business leaders. Indeed, it is commonly assumed that Mr. Reagan will oversee the most probusiness administration in decades. But that generality is, in many ways, misleading since American business is not a collection of uniformly like-minded people and identical institutions. It is an eclectic mix of companies, some nominally opposed to Government regulations and programs and some who would go broke without them.
 
 Under Mr. Reagan, the drift of economic policy, by all accounts, will be toward lessening the role of government in the marketplace while adding investment incentives to stimulate the private sector.  It is an agenda for changing the economic order and, by definition, it will have an uneven effect because many industries and companies have a direct stake in the established order. Some changes could come rapidly if the new President follows through with tentative plans, disclosed last week, for declaring an economic emergency soon after he takes office.
 
 In trying to curb inflation, deregulate the economy, encourage investment and toughen foreign policy, the program of the Reagan Administration portends crosscurrents and tradeoffs for business.
 
 It is on the inflation front that the business community's fondness for Mr. Reagan will be most severely tested. If the Reagan team is serious about arresting inflation, all of business could well suffer for a few years. The recent tight-money stance of the Federal Reserve Board has driven interest rates to record levels and slowed business activity. The Fed's tightfisted approach has been widely criticized by representatives of such pivotal industries as autos and housing, both of which are faltering badly, in part due to high interest rates. Yet Mr. Reagan and his advisers wholeheartedly support a conservative and generally restrictive Fed policy.
 
 Bringing down inflation, many analysts contend, will require persistent discipline. But one near-term result will be that ''unemployment and bankruptcies will rise, and corporate America will throw a fit, just like corporate Britain after less than two years of Mrs. Thatcher,'' The Economist, the conservative British journal that endorsed the Reagan candidacy, said in a recent editorial. Moreover, there is a growing uneasiness about the wisdom of the doctrine of ''supply-side'' economics, espoused by many in the Reagan camp. The supply-siders believe that slicing taxes will generate a surge that will produce more revenues for the Government than were lost by the original tax reduction.
 
 But the Reagan program of cutting taxes by 30 percent over three years while significantly increasing military spending strikes skeptics as a risky proposition. Besides, they note, the recent track record of economic doctrine has more than justified the discipline's sobriquet as the dismal science.
 
 ''As a businessman, I worry about Reagan when he says he's going to give people a tax break because I think it could very well be inflationary,'' said David W. Wallace, chairman of the Bangor Punta Corporation. ''It may backfire.''
 
 Mr. Reagan's pledge to liberate Adam Smith's invisible hand of the market from the restraints of Government will not please everyone.  The nation's small refiners, for instance, have since 1959 enjoyed a succession of Federal subsidies to help them compete with the big oil companies. But the Government's price-control and allocation programs are due to expire and some of Mr. Reagan's advisers have urged him to scrap these regulations.
 
 So the small refiners are now struggling for survival. With the end of price controls, those that lack their own supplies of crude oil fear they will not be able to get the raw materials they need to stay in business. Consequently, the American Petroleum Refiners Association, which represents 65 small companies, will be pushing hard in the new Congress for legislation that would give its members tax breaks and offer deductions for major companies supplying crude to small refiners. The road to deregulation will be strewn with such skirmishes.Reagan the Radical?
 
 Mr. Reagan is expected to assume a tough-guy posture in foreign affairs, and the effects on business will likely be mixed. The defense industry should prosper. But if Mr. Reagan's policies lead to a complete breakdown of detente, international trade could suffer. However, the prospects for trade depend largely on what the Russians do, international experts say. Should the Soviets invade Poland or, later, take similarly belligerent actions elsewhere, trade sanctions could be used effectively as a weapon.
 
 Without some extreme step by the Russians, ''the Reagan people might want to be tough but it wouldn't do much good,'' observed Harald B. Malmgren, an international business consultant in Washington. ''No one else would join us with sanctions.''
 
 Finally, Mr. Reagan is being urged by some of his militant advisers to act like a radical, not a businessman. If he is going to change things, they say, he must move quickly and boldly. Drastic actions are necessary, they argue, to steer the economy toward higher productivity and lower inflation. ''A conservative, managerial approach would be precisely the wrong thing to do,'' said Irving Kristol, a professor at the New York University business school and a senior fellow of the American Enterprise Institute. ''He has to move forcefully. What you want are economic measures that benefit business as a whole. And yes, some companies may drop by the wayside as a result, and they should.''


ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); DEREGULATION (89%); EXECUTIVES (78%); ECONOMIC POLICY (77%); TAXES & TAXATION (75%); TAX LAW (74%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (73%); INSOLVENCY & BANKRUPTCY (68%); FOREIGN POLICY (68%); CENTRAL BANKS (65%); INTEREST RATES (63%); DEFENSE SPENDING (63%); TAX RELIEF (62%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (52%); 
