3S8G-CJG0-000B-Y0KR


The New York Times


DEFINITION OF REAGANOMICS IS STILL BEING THRASHED OUT


19801130T000000Z


During the primary season, the struggle for intellectual respectability being fought by a rising Republican ideology known as ''supply side economics'' attracted much attention.
 
 ''The battle for Reagan's mind,'' as that effort was sometimes called, involved an attempt to convince Ronald Reagan to embrace a radical and highly controversial cure for the nation's economic problems.
 
 Six months later, the widespread predictions that the ensuing debate would lead to a schism between the new group and more traditional Reagan economic advisers have not proved prescient. But neither have the old-line economists won the clear victory they had hoped for. As last week's low-keyed jockeying over budget cuts demonstrated, an uneasy peace has been achieved.
 
 Preserving that truce may be difficult, however, because it was achieved largely by begging the question. Last summer, the two groups were able to construct policy proposals that satisfied the supply siders' demand for bold initiatives and the more conventional advisers' requirement of credibility within traditional economic bounds.
 
 Since the package was unveiled by Mr. Reagan in a speech in Chicago on Sep.9, the basic components have remained surprisingly intact. Mr. Reagan - as a candidate and as a President-elect - has continually reaffirmed his commitment to the Kemp-Roth tax cut, a 30 percent, three-year reduction for individuals to be followed by annual adjustment of tax brackets for inflation. More generous writeoffs for business and new investments are also included. At the same time, Mr. Reagan has not shirked from his promise of substantial budget cuts throughout the period, needed to soothe fears of massive budget deficits resulting from the tax cut which would cost $192 billion annually by 1985.
 
 Supply side economists such as Representative Jack Kemp, Republican of New York, and Arthur D. Laffer, a professor at the University of Southern California, are not opposed to budget cuts. Indeed, most favor them. What the supply siders reject is the notion that budget cuts are needed to compensate for the potential revenue loss from a tax cut. They maintain that these revenues will be replaced at least in large part by revenues that stem from the extra economic activity stimulated by lower taxes, a concept that has been dubbed the ''Laffer Curve.'' ''We felt w e were able to get the three objectives -tax cut, increased def ense spending and a balanced budget - reconciled withouthaving to mak e a heroic assumption about reflows,'' said George P.  Shultz, chair man of Mr. Reagan's Economic Policy Coordinating Committee. '' If it happens we'll all be delighted, but we shouldn't assume it wil l happen and put all our chips on its happening.''
 
 Mr. Reagan's current policy positions have cheered the supply side camp, particularly because it seemed for a while this summer th at their brief prominence had come to an end. Th e Laffer Curve was in disrepute, having been disavowed by influenti al Republicans such as Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the prospective c hairman of the Finance Committee in the new Congress. And of the sup ply side group, only Mr.Kemp attained any substantial role in the Rea gan campaign. Now they are feeling better.
 
 Who Could Be Who
 
 ''We came away from our meeting in Los Angeles two weeks ago with a remarkable degree of unanimity,'' said Mr. Kemp. ''We have made a significant degree of progress in convincing some of the long-time Reagan advisers that the income tax is a tax on production.''
 
 The next great test of whether the new President will be able to satisfy both camps will come in the selection of an economic team.  Each side has its favorite candidates. For the post of Director of the Office of Management and Budget, for example, Caspar W.  Weinberger is being pushed by the traditional economists, while the supply siders would like Representative Dave Stockman, Republican of Michigan.
 
 Mr. Reagan's inclinations are not yet clear, particularly now that William E. Simon, the former Treasury Secretary who seemed virtually sure to be the next Treasury Secretary, has dropped out. The traditionalists would like someone like Alan Greenspan, former chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, or Walter W. Wriston, chairman of Citicorp. The supply-side candidate is New York businessman Lewis Lehrman, whose lack of Government experience or financial prominence would make his selection unlikely.
 
 Group members privately suggest that a satisfactory alternative would be a senior post at Treasury for Mr. Lehrman, such as Under Secretary for Monetary Affairs, and a job for Mr. Laffer like Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs. In their minds, Mr.  Reagan's response to these requests is an important test of the new President's commitment to supply side economics.And Then There's Inflation
 
 And while Mr. Reagan has succeeded in plotting a preliminary policy course, he has not had to confront the practical demands of office.  For example, he has laid out targets for budget cutting, but Congress, where Democrats still have a majority in the House of Representatives, has yet to offer reassurance that it will go along.  Would Mr. Reagan stick to Kemp-Roth if large budget deficits seemed likely?
 
 Perhaps not. For above all, dealing with inflation will be one of Mr. Reagan's greatest challenges, as the 1 percent increase in consumer prices reported last week - a double-digit annual rate - amply demonstrated. Large deficits played a major role in kindling inflationary fears earlier this year. (The week's economic news also provided evidence of other problems: The value of workers' pay checks fell by 0.6 percent last month, and business productivity's rise in the third quarter was less than had been expected.)
 
 While Mr. Reagan's economic advisers have taken pains to emphasize their unanimity, small cracks have already appeared, most of which do not even involve supply side issues. For instance, Mr. Weinberger and other Reagan advisers disagree over how quickly the Federal budget can be cut.
 
 The supply siders are also concerned about Mr. Reagan's monetary policies. They want the value of the dollar firmly maintained, perhaps by pegging it to gold. So far Mr. Reagan isn't biting. The supply side group is willing to give him time; for one thing, the term of Paul A. Volcker as Chairman of the Federal Reserve doesn't expire until August 1983. But how much time any of Mr. Reagan's advisers will give the new President to embrace their particular beliefs will most likely determine how long the uneasy truce lasts.


UNITED STATES ECONOMY; TAXATION; INCOME TAX; BUDGETS AND BUDGETING; APPOINTMENTS AND EXECUTIVE CHANGES  ECONOMIC NEWS (91%); ECONOMIC POLICY (90%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); BUDGETS (90%); TAXES & TAXATION (90%); BUDGET CUTS (89%); TAX LAW (89%); TAX RELIEF (86%); INCOME TAX (86%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); BUDGET DEFICITS (74%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%); 
