3S8G-CFY0-000B-Y467


The New York Times


CITIBANK SETS $15 FEE ON ITS 2 CREDIT CARDS; LOANS TO COST 19.8%


19801218T000000Z


Citibank will impose a $15 annual fee on its Visa and MasterCard credit cards beginning in mid-January and will raise the interest rate on all loans against its credit cards to 19.8 percent a year.
 
 Notification of the changes has been mailed to the approximately 5.8 million individuals across the country who hold Citibank credit cards, about 1.2 million of them in New York State. The move, reported initially by banking sources, was confirmed yesterday by Dee M. Calligar, vice president and general counsel of the bank's credit card division. Legislation Signed Nov. 26
 
 The fees and higher interest rates were made possible by a recent New York State law that removed civil usury ceilings from consumer loans. Governor Carey signed the legislation on Nov. 26. The state's criminal usury law, which puts a 25 percent ceiling on annual rates of interest that may be charged, still stands.
 
 As of yesterday, no other major bank had decided what its new rates and fees would be. But, according to industry sources, some banks are expected to offer more attractive terms than those being offered by Citibank.
 
 Several bankers, who asked not to be identified, said they were surprised that Citibank, the nation's second-largest bank after the Bank of America, had set its fees as high as it did. In California, which has no usury restrictions, the Bank of America charges a $12 annual fee and an interest rate of 18 percent.
 
 Until Jan. 1, when credit cards come under the new law, New York State usury laws forbid fees and limit the amount of interest that may be charged on credit cards. For loans stemming from purchases, banks may charge up to 18 percent on the first $500 outstanding, and up to 12 percent on any balance above that. For loans stemming from cash advances against credit cards, the limit is 12 percent no matter what the balance. Auto Loans Up to 17% to 19%
 
 For consumer installment loans, such as automobile loans, the new law became effective on Dec. 1. Since then, most banks have raised the rates they charge on such loans to 17 to 19 percent. Under the usury laws, the range had been from slightly less than 12 percent to slightly more than 13 percent.
 
 Any new credit cards issued on or after Jan. 1 would not be subject to the usury laws that are still in effect today. At Citibank, new cardholders would immediately have to pay the $15 annual fee and pay 19.8 percent on any credit extended through the card.
 
 For existing cardholders, the bank must give at least 30 days' notice before any rate rise. The fees and higher interest rates on existing Citibank cards will be effective Jan. 19, Mr. Calligar said.
 
 Under the new Citibank plan, the credit-card customer every month must pay a 36th of what is owed on all amounts of $720 and above.  The minimum monthly payment on any amount below $720 is $20. That represents a tightening of the present policy, under which customers also pay a 36th of what they own each month, but with a minimum payment of only $5.
 
 The 19.8% rate of interest will be calculated on a simple-interest basis: If a customer were to owe exactly $100 for an entire year, the cost would be $19.80.
 
 Under the law, any existing balances, or any new balances added to an existing Citibank card up to Jan. 19, will remain subject to the old usury laws until the loan is fully repaid, even if the cardholder obtains higher-cost credit on the card after mid-January.
 
 If a cardholder never uses his Citibank credit card after Jan. 19, he will not have to pay the $15 fee. If he does use his card after that date, the $15 fee will appear on his next bill.
 
 The new law allows Citibank to raise its rates at any time, but it must give at least 30 days' notice. Under that law, if the cardholder does not use his card after the expiration of the 30-day period, the rate would not rise on his outstanding balance. But if he does, the rate would rise on his entire outstanding balance, except that portion that was drawn before Jan. 19.
 
 Citibank says that, as a result of New York's usury laws, it has lost $100 million in the last year on its consumer-lending activities, especially on its credit cards.
 
 The bank had lobbied hard to convince the New York State Legislature to remove the usury laws and had threatened to move its credit-card operations to South Dakota from Long Island, where it employs more than 2,000 people. Citibank succeeded in convincing the South Dakota Legislature to enact a measure that permits out-ofstate banks to establish banking subsidiaries in the state.
 
 Following passage of the measure earlier this year, Citibank applied for permission to open a subisidary in Sioux Falls, S.D. If it gets all the necessary regulatory approvals, it plans to move its credit-card operation to South Dakota despite the elimination of the usury ceilings in New York. Citibank has already received approvals from the authorities in South Dakota and from the Comptroller of the Currency in Washington but still awaits word from the Federal Reserve Board. Travel-and Expense Cards
 
 Bank credit cards are not the same as so-called travel-and-expense cards. These are the American Express card, which has about 11.5 million holders; the Diner's Club card, which has about a million holders, and the Carte Blanche card, which has about 1.5 million holders.
 
 Unlike credit-card customers, holders of travel-and-expense cards are expected to pay their bills as soon as they are received. Thus, because travel-and-expense cards are not designed to provide credit, they have not been subject to usury laws.
 
 Fees have been charged on travel-and-expense cards for years. At present, the basic annual fee on the American Express card, which dominates the market, is $35. Citibank purchased Carte Blanche in September 1978 and is in the process of acquiring the Diner's Club card, both of whose basic fees are also $35 a year.


INTEREST RATES (91%); ECONOMIC NEWS (91%); CREDIT CARDS (90%); PAYMENT CARDS & SERVICES (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); BANKING LAW (89%); CONSUMER LENDING (89%); LAWYERS (72%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (70%); CRIMINAL LAW (70%); 
