3S8G-CFD0-000B-Y2SW


The New York Times


CREDIT MARKETS;SKEPTICISM OVER 'PEAK' IN RATES


19801222T000000Z


Interest rates are sharply below a week ago, but there remains a healthy skepticism in the marketplace that rates have really peaked.  ''Quite recently there have been a few straws in the wind, but that is all'' to suggest that rates have peaked, said Donald C. Miller, vice chairman and chief financial officer at the Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Company. Interest rates that the bank pays for money it borrows began to fall late last week, ''and there has been some flattening of business loan demands,'' the banker added.
 
 In sum, Mr. Miller, like many others, is unsure that the longpredicted rate peak is at hand. ''We could wake up a month from now and say were were fooled again,'' Mr. Miller remarked.
 
 After Chemical Bank officials held an interest-rate meeting late Friday, Richard Scott-Ram, an economist in the group, said that ''the conditions for a sustained drop in interest rates are not yet at hand,'' adding: ''The money supply has not yet established a decellerating trend, the economy has not yet shown convincing signs of slowing and loan demand continues to soar.'' Fall in Money Supply Not Enough
 
 Although the basic money supply, M-1B, declined $1.6 billion in the week ended Dec. 10, analysts explain that growth remains so rapid that furthur declines would be needed before the Federal Reserve Board would seek lower interest rates. In the meantime, they say, rates could increase slightly because of heavy loan demands by business while the Fed does not change its stance.
 
 While anecdotal reports of bankers and economists describe an economy that is weakening rapidly, Government statistics are still reporting the conditions of a month or more ago, when rates were lower. It could be January before economic announcements show a seriously weakening economy, they say.
 
 An economist at Chase Manhattan Bank, Philip Braverman, agrees that ultimately lower interest rates will come, but only after high interest rates have forced the economy to fall back into recession.  ''But that elusive cyclical turning point must still be considered at least a month or so away at the earliest, despite the market's euphoria,'' Mr. Braverman said. Market Gains Last Week
 
 The market's euphoria was great indeed last week. Three- and sixmonth Treasury bills were traded late Friday with rates 1.5 percentage points lower than a day earlier, and Treasury bonds jumped nearly five points, or $30 a bond.
 
 After the day's rally, the price gains of recently sold Treasury issues were impressive, but dealers said that investor buying of intermediate- and long-term issues was slight and not of the same magnitude as last April and May, when bond yields were falling sharply.
 
 By late Friday, the new 15 1/8 percent Treasury notes due in two years were offered at about 103 to yield 13 1/4 percent and new 14 percent four-year notes were offered at nearly 104 to yield 12.7 percent. The 12 3/4 percent bonds due 2010 were offered at 106 1/2 to yield around 11.92 percent.
 
 The extreme drop in yield for Treasury issues was not matched in other sectors. While most selling of commercial paper and large multimillion-dollar bank certificates of deposit occurs in the first half of the day, dealers noted that those interest rates did not decline nearly as much as Treasury bills.
 
 For example, the rate of highest quality 30-day commercial paper fell only about 3/8 percentage point, to 20 percent, while the three-month Treasury bill rate fell from about 16.1 percent late Thursday to 15.10 percent early Friday and 14.5 percent late Friday. Questions About Depth of Drop
 
 Besides the uncertainty of when rates peak, there is much uncertainty about how much rates will fall. Discussing the extent of the decline, Donald Maude, chief financial economist at Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith, concludes that much depends ''upon the shape of both fiscal and monetary policy over the first two quarters of 1981.''
 
 On the fiscal policy side, the markets are expecting the incoming administration to curb inflation by, among other things, slowing the growth of Federal spending. ''This goodwill,'' said Henry Kaufman, economist at Salomon Brothers, ''can only have lasting meaning and impact if effective measures are introduced quickly.''
 
 On the monetary policy side, numerous analysts expect the Fed to try to avoid the extremes of 1980, when the money supply first languished below the minimum growth rate targeted by the Fed but then accelerated in the second half to a far more rapid rate than the Fed desired.
 
 Many market participants doubt that the Fed will allow short-term interest rates to drop as much as last spring, when Federal funds fell from a peak of 19.39 in the week ended April 2 to 8.68 percent in the week ended July 23. The Federal funds market, where banks and others arrange short-term loans, determines the extent of rate declines for other securities.
 
 Edward Yardeni, for example, predicts that the prime rate could fall only to about 15 percent during the first half of 1981, compared with the low of 10 3/4 percent reached last summer. Money supply growth will slow, Mr. Yardeni and others say, but they add that the Fed's efforts to speed money growth will be more modest than they were during 1980.


INTEREST RATES (91%); ECONOMIC NEWS (91%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); MONEY SUPPLY (90%); COMMERCIAL BANKING (89%); TREASURY SECURITIES (89%); BONDS (89%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (87%); CENTRAL BANKS (79%); STATISTICS (79%); RECESSION (76%); TRENDS (76%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (74%); COMMERCIAL LENDING (70%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (69%); BOND MARKETS (65%); GOVERNMENT BONDS (63%); EXECUTIVES (57%); 
