3S8G-CDS0-000B-Y113


The New York Times


THE NATION


19801228T000000Z


While some of Ronald Reagan's advisers concentrated on the condition of the economy last week, others concentrated on defining its state (seeking, as transition director Edwin Meese 3d put it ''the exact format, the exact language, the exact terminology'').  Both exercises gave the specialists plenty to think about.
 
 For the third month in a row, consumer prices rose by exactly 1 percent. Overall, November's figure guarantees that 1980 will wind up like 1979, with consumer prices the double-digits. And that guarantees the Reagan White House's biggest economic problem will be the same as the Carter White House's: inflation. Mr. Reagan's economists already began to sound like they had been around Washington for a while. Said Martin Anderson, newly named assistant for policy development last week, there is ''no magic wand you can wave.''
 
 And presumably, the policy developers will also have to deal with recession. The economy is livelier than previously predicted (third quarter growth was reported last week as a not-so-bad 2.4 percent), and the prime interest rate may be inching down (it closed the week at some banks at a mere 20 1/2 percent). But even if its highs have peaked (and there is disagreement about that), most analysts say the recent acceleration in the prime has already done its damage.  Recovery from last spring's interest-induced slump is not expected to last.
 
 Is this or is it not an emergency?  In the Chrysler Corporation's book, yes. Although the United Auto Workers last week rejected a plea for a wage freeze, the union agreed to renegotiate its contract for the third time, and the company went to Washington for $400 million in new loans. As for the Reagan team, it's reserving judgment on Chrysler. (That, at least, is still a Carter problem.)
 
 On the national economic emergency, however, which Reagan spokesmen declared two weeks ago might be declared, some of the Presidentelect's advisers haven't had to resort to their dictionaries. The most clearly defined statement came from former Federal Reserve chairman Arthur F. Burns. A formal declaration of emergency is ''not a good idea,'' he said. ''I doubt very much it will be pursued.''


CONSUMER PRICE INDEX (90%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); DAMAGES (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); RECESSION (78%); PRIME RATES (78%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (78%); PRICE CHANGES (76%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); BANKING & FINANCE (73%); PRICE INCREASES (71%); AUTOMOTIVE WORKERS (69%); INTEREST RATES (66%); WAGES & SALARIES (63%); COLLECTIVE BARGAINING (63%); 
