3S8G-CHB0-000B-Y2V3


The New York Times


MARKET PLACE


19801208T000000Z


R ISING interest rates. High inflation rates. An uncertain business climate at home. The dan ger of flaring tensions abroad. The Dow Jonesindustrials b reaking through 1,000, only to fall back.
 
 All these factors have combined to create an uneasy atmosphere on Wall Street. As a result, the population of bullish analysts has become somewhat depleted lately.
 
 But William J. Gillard, director of the investment policy group at Kidder, Peabody & Company, remains resolutely optimistic over prospects for the stock market.
 
 ''There is no disputing the fact that there are substantial negatives at hand and expected for the first half of 1981,'' he asserted. ''But if, as we believe, the market is looking beyond that time frame, improved approaches to monetary and fiscal policy should be reflected in a continued strong market.''
 
 Mr. Gillard's perception of the Nov. 4 election results also differs from that of most on the Street. As outlined in the December issue of Kidder, Peabody's investment policy publication, Mr. Gillard acknowledges that many people worry about what they see as inflationary effects of various programs that President-elect Ronald Reagan is likely to endorse.
 
 ''On the positive side, however, we perceive the Reagan victory much differently than do many observers,'' he stated. ''We see it as a firm indication that the country is in the midst of change for the better, rather than at the start of change.
 
 ''This perspective leads us to a hopeful conclusion about the future, rather than tremendous concern about the present.'' And where does this lead in terms of stock recommendations?  Kidder, Peabody, like many other brokerage firms, maintains a ''selected stock list.'' In effect, this constitutes a suggested buy list for specific issues.
 
 Recent additions to Kidder, Peabody's selected list include a variety of stocks: Amsted Industries, a supplier of railroad car components; Conoco, a diversified producer of energy; Levi Strauss, a manufacturer of jeans and other apparel; Payless Cashways, a retailer of building materials, and Delta Air Lines, described as ''potentially attractive in the deregulated and newly competitive industry.''
 
 Recommendations also include three hospital management companies.  (It is, however, important for investors to bear in mind that some market analysts have counseled profit taking in this sector in light of strong price appreciation for numerous issues in recent years.)
 
 For its part, Kidder, Peabody takes this view of the hospital management industry: ''We expect earnings to grow 25 percent annually over the next five years. An important positive investment consideration is that the industry is moving from a capital-short status to one of internal financing.''
 
 The brokerage house's three recent recommendations in this industry are American Medical International, the Hospital Corporation of America and the Lifemark Corporation.
 
 Meanwhile, continuing recommendations on its selected list in the field of health care include Eli Lilly, Pfize r, Searle and Upjohn.  Some Wall Street professionals might not ag ree with him, but Mr.  Gillard's ''strongly positive'' attitude towa rd the stock market is geared to what he considers to be the outlook for the next several years - not simply the next six months. 'Cablemania'
 
 Cable television stocks have become hot properties in Wall Street - a condition that some market analysts describe as ''cablemania.'' The majority of cable TV stocks sell at prices ranging anywhere from 15 to 30 times their annual earnings, according to David A. Goldman, who follows this growing industry for Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Company.
 
 ''These equities appear, at first, ludicrously overvalued,'' he noted in a current report. ''Actually, their valuations represent the prices the shares might command if the companies were to be courted for takeover.
 
 ''The regional 'monopoly' aspects of cable TV companies, their strong growth potential and high levels of cash flow (once capital needs have been satisfied) make the companies ideal takeover targets. The single largest risk in this buy-out method of valuation is that the companies in question will not be acquired.''
 
 Therefore, Mr. Goldman believes that ''investments in CATV equities must be viewed as volatile and risky long-term commitments.'' In his approach, the Smith Barney analyst evaluates cable television issues on the basis of three specific criteria: growth with profitability; positioning within the industry, and takeover potential.
 
 At present, he recommends four stocks: the Acton Corporation, Adams-Russell, United Cable Television and Viacom International.end


ECONOMIC NEWS (91%); INFLATION (91%); BUSINESS CLIMATE & CONDITIONS (89%); HOSPITALS (84%); ECONOMIC POLICY (78%); INTEREST RATES (78%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (78%); DEREGULATION (78%); BROKER RECOMMENDATIONS (77%); COMPANY EARNINGS (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (76%); STOCK EXCHANGES (75%); MONETARY POLICY (73%); PUBLIC FINANCE (73%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (68%); RAILROAD ROLLING STOCK MFG (67%); ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS (61%); RAILROAD ROLLING STOCK (50%); 
