3S8G-CGH0-000B-Y0M0


The New York Times


ECONOMICS;MEMO TO REAGAN: 'AVOIDING ECONOMIC DUNKIRK'


19801214T000000Z


Two of President-elect Ronald Reagan's closest advisers have offered a strong and detailed plan, ''Avoiding a GOP Economic Dunkirk,'' for the first 100 days of the new administration. The authors of the report, prepared last month shortly before the latest run-up in interest rates, are Representatives David A. Stockman of Michigan and Jack F. Kemp of upstate New York.
 
 Mr. Stockman was appointed last week to head the Office of Management and Budget. Mr. Kemp, new chairman of the House Republican Conference, has lent his name to a tax-cutting bill that Mr. Reagan has espoused. Following are excerpts from the 23-page Stockman-Kemp plan. Gathering Storm
 
 T HE momentum of short-run economic, financial and budget forces is creating the conditions for an economic Dunkirk during the first 24 months of the Reagan Administration. These major factors threaten:
 
 A SECOND 1980 CREDIT CRUNCH. By year end, rising bank rates will cause further deterioration in long-term capital markets for bonds and equities, a renewed consumer spending slowdown, and intensified uncertainty throughout financial markets.
 
 There are a number of potential contributory forces. The most important is the fact that the Federal Reserve Board has been substantially overshooting its 1980 money supply growth goals ever since mid-summer. In addition, the Treasury will impose massive financing requirements on the market through Jan. 1, including about $100 billion in refinancing and potentially $25 billion to $28 billion in new cash.
 
 In all, President Reagan will inherit thoroughly disordered credit and capital markets, punishingly high interest rates, and a hairtrigger market psychology poised to respond strongly to early economic policy signals in either favorable or unfavorable ways.
 
 A DOUBLE-DIP RECESSION IN EARLY 1981. This is now at least a 50 percent possibility. Stagnant or declining real growth in the gross national product in the first two quarters would generate a further worsening of an already dismal budget posture and a profusion of ''quick-fix'' remedies for various ''wounded'' sectors of the economy - autos, housing, etc.
 
 There is a further danger; the Federal budget has now become an automatic ''coast-to-coast soup line'' that dispenses remedial aid with almost reckless abandon. For instance, estimates for fiscal 1981 trade adjustment assistance have exploded from $400 million in June to $2.5 billion as of November.
 
 For these reasons, the first hard look at the unvarnished fiscal 1981 and 1982 budget posture is likely to produce an intense polarization between supply-side tax cutters and the more fiscally orthodox. An internecine struggle over deferral or temporary abandonment of the tax program could ensue. The result would be a severe demoralization and fractionalization of G.O.P. ranks and an erosion of our capacity to govern successfully and revive the economy before November 1982.
 
 FEDERAL BUDGET AND CREDIT H EMORRHAGE. The l atest estimates place fiscal 1981 outlays at nearly $650 billion. T hat represents a $36 billion growth between the first budget resol ution passed in June andthe outlook in November. Of the $36 billion, fully $26 billion, or 72 percent, is due to automatic budget respon ses in entitlements, indexing, debt servicing, budget authority sp end-down rates, and loanfacilities spread throughout the Federal Gove rnment.
 
 When the off-budget deficit is included, which it must be, since most of this category is ultimately financed in the government market for bonds and Treasury bills, the pre-tax-cut deficit for fiscal 19 81 ranges b etween $50 billion and $60 billion.
 
 The vigorous tax-cut package required to spur the supply side of the economy could raise the total fiscal 1981 deficit to the $60 billion to $80 billion range. Thus, unless the tax-cut program is accompanied by a credible and severe program to curtail fiscal 1981-1982 outlays, future spending authority, and overall Federal credit absorption, financial market worries about a ''Reagan inflation'' will be confirmed.
 
 COMMODITY SHOCKS AND MONETARY POLICY. The United States economy is likely to face two serious commodity price run-ups during the next five to 15 months.
 
 First, if the Iran-Iraq war is not soon terminated, today's excess worldwide crude and product inventories will be largely depleted by February or March. OPEC contract rates will rise toward spot market levels in the $40 to $50 per barrel range during the first and second quarters of 1981.
 
 Similarly, the present rapid draw-down of worldwide feed grain and protein oil reserves could turn into a rout by the fall of 1981, if the Soviets have another ''Communist'' (i.e. poor) harvest and production is average-to-below-average elsewhere in the world. Per bushel prices of $4 to $5 for corn, $6 to $7 for wheat, and $10 to $11 for soybeans are a distinct possibility.
 
 If the Federal Reserve chooses to accommodate these price/credit shocks, as it has in the past, then in the context of the massive Federal credit demand and financial market disorders described above, only one result is certain: the already tattered credibility of the post-October 1979 monetary policy of Federal Reserve chairman Paul Volcker will be destroyed. The conditions for full-scale financial panic and unprecedented global monetary turbulence will be present.
 
 THE REGULATORY TIME BOMB. During the early and mid-1970's, Congress approved more than a dozen sweeping environmental, energy and safety enabling authorities, which for all practical purposes are devoid of policy standards and criteria for cost-benefit, cost-effectiveness, and comparative risk analysis.
 
 Subsequently, McGovernite no-growth activists assumed control of most of the relevant sub-Cabinet policy posts during the Carter Administration. They have spent the past four years ''tooling up'' for implementation through a mind-boggling outpouring of rulemakings, interpretative guidelines, and major litigation - all heavily biased toward maximization of regulatory scope and burden.
 
 All told, there are easily in excess of $100 billion in new environmental safety and energy compliance costs scheduled for the early 1980's. Political Threat
 
 This review of the multiple challenges and threats lying in ambush contains an inescapable warning: If bold policies are not swiftly, deftly and courageously implemented in the first six months, Washington will quickly become engulfed in political disorder commensurate with the surrounding economic disarray.
 
 The specific danger is this: If President Reagan does not lead a creatively orchestrated high-profile policy offensive based on revision of the fundamentals - supply-side tax cuts and regulatory relief, stern outlay control and Federal fiscal retrenchment, and monetary reform and dollar stabilization - the thin Senate Republican majority and the de facto conservative majority in the House will fragment.Emergency Program
 
 In order to dominate, shape and control the Washington agenda, President Reagan should declare a national economic emergency soon after inauguration. He should request that Congress quickly clear the decks for exclusive action for 100 days on an Emergency Economic Stabilization and Recovery Program he would soon announce.
 
 Five major principles should govern the formulation of the package:
 
 * A static ''waste-cutting'' approach to the fiscal 1981 outlay component of the fiscal hemorrhage will hardly make a dent in the true fiscal problem. Policy initiatives designed to spur output growth and to lower inflation expectations and interest rates must carry a large share of the burden.
 
 * For this reason, dilution of the tax-cut program in order to limit short-run static revenue losses during the remainder of fiscal 1981 and 1982 would be counterproductive.
 
 * A dramatic, substantial recission of the regulatory burden is needed both for the short-term cash flow relief it will provide to business and the long-term bullish signal it will provide to corporate investment planners.
 
 * New budget authority increased from $556 billion in fiscal 1979 to nearly $660 billion in fiscal 1980 and much of this authority will create outlay streams and Treasury cash borrowing requirements in fiscal 1981 an d beyond. The fiscal stabilization package, therefore, must be at mi nimum equally weighted between out-year spending and entitlement a uthority reductions and cash outlay savings for the remainder of fiscal 1981.
 
 * Certain pre-emptive steps must be taken early on to keep control of the agenda and to maintain Capitol Hill focus on the stabilization and recovery program. Foremost, all remaining petroleum product controls and allocations should be canceled on Day 1. In addition, some informal agreement with key lawmakers should be sought to defer such items as the labor policy agenda (minimum wage, Davis Bacon, etc.) until the fall of 1981. There is no point in antagonizing organized labor during this critical period. Major Components
 
 SUPPLY-SIDE TAX CHANGES. The calendar year 1981 and 1982 installments of Kemp-Roth, reduction of the top income tax rate on unearned income to 50 percent, further cuts in capital gains, and a substantial reform along 10-5-3 lines of corporate depreciation are needed.
 
 FISCAL STABILIZATION. Cash outlays for the remainder of fiscal 1981 should be held to the $635 billion range. A hiring freeze and a severe cutback in agency travel, equipment procurement, and outside contracting would be the major areas for savings.
 
 The out-year authority reduction package should cut Federal domestic program levels by $30 billion to $50 billion a year in the fiscal 1982-1983 period.
 
 We are now spending about $25 billion a year for highways, mass transit, sewer treatment facilities, public works, national parks, and airport facilities. The benefit stream from these investments will accrue over the next 20 to 40 years. Thus, a modest deferral and stretch-out of activity rates (a 10 percent to 20 percent reduction) in these areas should be considered.
 
 Current expenditures for non-Social Security entitlements, including food stamps, Medicaid, disability, heating assistance, housing assistance, school lunches, unemployment compensation, and so on amount to $100 billion. A carefully tailored package to reduce eligibility, overlap and abuse should be developed for these areas - with potential savings of $10 billion to $20 billion.
 
 Total fiscal expenditures for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act, the Community Development Program, the Economic Development Administration, urban parks, arts and humanities, and the like amount to $25 billion. Most of these programs are ineffective or of low priority and could be cut by at least one-third, or $8 billion.
 
 REGULATORY VENTILATION.First and most urgent, a series of unilateral administrative actions must be taken to defer, revise or rescind existing and pending regulations where clear legal authority exists. The potential here is really staggering, as the hastily compiled list of specific action indicates (see table).
 
 On a second front, both temporary and permanent statutory revisions will be needed. There are literally dozens of rule-making and compliance deadlines on the statute books for the next 20 months that cannot be prudently met. An omnibus ''suspense bill'' might be necessary during the 100 days to defer these deadlines and to implement the one-year moratorium on new rule-makings proposed by Murray Wiedenbaum.
 
 Finally, a fundamental legislative policy reform package will have to be developed. This would primarily involve the insertion of mandatory cost-benefit, cost-effectiveness, and comparative risk analyses into the basic enabling acts - Clean Air and Water, Safe Drinking Water, OSHA, etc.
 
 CONTINGENCY ENERGY PACKAGE. Beyond the pre-emptive step of dismantling controls before an oil crisis really hits - incidentally, the combination of immediate decontrol and a $10-a-barrel rise in the world oil price would increase windfall profits tax revenue by $20 billion to $25 billion during calendar 1981 - a planning team should be readying a package of emergency steps to increase short-run domestic energy production and utilization in case of a severe supply pinch.
 
 The primary areas for short-run gains would be: accelerating the licensing of a half-dozen completed nuclear plants; removing all end-use restrictions on natural gas; permitting accelerated infill drilling; eliminating stripper and marginal oil properties from the windfall tax; allowing emerge ncy variances fo r industrial and utilitycoal boilers, etc.
 
 If the crisis is severe enough, rapid statutory revision of the natural gas decontrol program and modification of the windfall tax might be considered as part of the 100-day agenda.
 
 A MONETARY ACCORD. President Reagan should meet with Mr. Volcker or the entire Federal Reserve Board at an early date and issue them a new informal ''charter'' - namely, to eschew all consideration of extraneous economic variables like shor t-term interest rates, housingmarket condit ions, business cycle fluctuations, etc., and to concentrate i nstead on one exclusive task: bringing the growth of Federal Reser ve credit and bank reserves to a prudent rate and stabilization of the international and domestic purchasing power of the dollar.
 
 The President and Congress would stoutly defend the Federal Reserve from all political attacks. Insulation of the Fed from extraneous economic and financial preoccupations, political pressures, recalibration of its monetary objective, and restoration of its tattered credibility is the critical linchpin in the whole program.  Regulatory VentilationACTION IMPACTGrant model year 1982 $300 million to industry savingsCarbon monoxide waiverRescind passive restraint o $600 million auto standard (airbags) gs over three yearsRelax 1984 heavy duty truck mum savings of $100 emission standard millionSimplify auto emissions $80 million a year certification and testingModify ambient air standard n to $40 billion in for ozone to permit multiple ed compliance costs exceedences or higher standard er next eight years value in conformance with scientific evidenceEliminate unnecessary llion to $2 billion New Source Performance the next five years Standards for small industrial boilersCancel E.P.A. fuel ings of $90 million additive testing program to $120 millionRelax proposed light duty ld be a substantial truck emission standards of currently estifor post-1983 ion compliance costModify or defer E.P.A.  ubstantial fraction pretreatment standards billion compliance for industrial waste-water ust three sectors - es, steel and paperCancel D.O.E. appliance illion dollar havoc efficiency standards try that is already product efficiency to market pressureEliminate building energy s are working here, performance standards igid B.T.U. budgets new structure could s of dollars a year st-effective energy savingsModify the Resource ld be some fraction Conservation and Recovery Act f $2 billion a year incorporate ''degree of hazard'' and control system simplificationDefer new OSHA workplace $250 million a year noise standardsModify or defer pending 1 billion in annual OSHA standards on scaffolding, combined savings.  asbestos exposure, cadmium and chromium exposure, and grain elevator dust control


ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); BUDGETS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); CREDIT CRISIS (78%); ECONOMIC POLICY (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (78%); GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT (78%); PUBLIC FINANCE (78%); INTEREST RATES (77%); CENTRAL BANKS (77%); TAX RELIEF (75%); RECESSION (72%); BONDS (72%); MONEY SUPPLY (71%); 
