3S8G-CJT0-000B-Y17V


The New York Times


Fighting Inflation Without Hands


19801128T000000Z


We had another peek under the tent of the Reagan Administration's training camp the other day and there stood George Shultz making some very encouraging noises about how to fight inflationary wages.
 
 Mr. Shultz, one of the President-elect's respected economic advisers, was complaining about the wage levels in some industries, notably autos and steel. One way to fight inflation, he said, would be for the Reagan Administration to suggest wage moderation to them before entertaining any more of their cries for special help. When those industries next complain about foreign competition, he said, they need to be told to ''figure out ways out of the bind they've got themselves into.''
 
 Hooray. If this is indeed the direction of policy planning in which the new Administration is headed, it implies a welcome modification of the laissez-faire doctrines that seemed to dominate the Reagan circle during the Presidential election campaign. Letting the steel and automobile companies and unions stew in their own costly broth may sound like a ''hands off'' policy. But what Mr. Shultz was really threatening was Federal indifference - a withholding of special aid -to industries that do not heed the summons to make America competitive by restraining inflation. That approach offers a further hope that the Reagan Administration will attack inflationary conduct on a short-term as well as a long-term basis.
 
 The outlook for industrial wages in the year ahead is most worrisome. Costly new contracts negotiated in 1981 could well wreck a sensible economic policy that is not likely to pull down the basic inflation rate until 1982 at best. A few powerful unions have managed to win contracts that virtually immunize them against inflation, while most workers are finding their incomes eroded daily.
 
 The average American family last year lost more than 6 percent of its purchasing power to inflation and is eager to catch up. The process may already be under way. Union contracts signed in the first nine months of 1980 raised first-year wages by an average of 9.7 percent - not counting cost-of-living adjustments. The comparable figure last year was 7.4 percent. If Mr. Reagan wants to show any early progress against inflation, he will have to arrest this trend.
 
 As Mr. Shultz acknowledged, the task will require playing tough ball against industries that have historically had the power to sap the consumer and to influence the Federal Government. Resisting them may well require an even deeper Federal involvement in labor matters than Mr. Shultz is ready for. Mr. Reagan may yearn to bury the incomes policies of past Administrations and the wage-price guidelines that President Carter discredited. But no effort mounted against inflation can be credible if the Gover nment simply ignores immoderate wa ge and price increases.
 
 Only by using the early days of his Administration to appeal for restraint in wages and prices will Mr. Reagan gain the time he needs to let the contemplated changes in tax and spending policies take hold. He may not want to enunciate permissible levels of increase.  But as Mr. Shultz seems to understand, he will have to recognize - and move against - impermissible increases as they appear.


UNITED STATES POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; UNITED STATES ECONOMY; WAGES AND SALARIES; WAGE AND PRICE CONTROLS  WAGES & SALARIES (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); ECONOMIC POLICY (89%); INFLATION (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); AUTOMOBILE MFG (78%); ELECTIONS (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); POLITICS (77%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (77%); LABOR UNIONS (77%); COST OF LIVING (77%); CONTRACT AWARDS (75%); PRICE MANAGEMENT (74%); PRICE INCREASES (66%); 
