3S8G-CFF0-000B-Y2W1


The New York Times


MILLER ASSERTS TALK OF ECONOMIC CRISIS COULD CREATE ONE


19801221T000000Z


Treasury Secretary G. William Miller contends that no national economic emergency exists but that talk of one by aides to President-elect Ronald Reagan ''may be creating that emergency.''
 
 In a multipronged criticism of the incoming administration, Mr.  Miller said the President-elect seemed to be putting tax cuts ahead of spending cuts. He said such a ''looseness in fiscal policy'' would increase the Federal budget deficit and could ''drive interest rates through the roof.''
 
 Mr. Miller, the chief economic spokesman for the Carter Administration, offered those comments and a moderately positive assessment of economic conditions in a 50-minute informal meeting with reporters Friday evening before leaving for a two-week Christmas holiday in the Bahamas.
 
 First Attack Since Election
 
 The Secretary's remarks amounted to the outgoing administration's first attack on Mr. Reagan's economics since the election campaign.  They appeared to be a portent that President Carter intended to bow out next month with a strong reaffirmation of his economic policies that would amount to criticism of Mr. Reagan's approach, as it is now understood.
 
 Charles L. Schultze, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, has voiced comments like Mr. Miller's in recent days. Both men, it was understood, had Mr. Carter's approval.
 
 Mr. Miller made these other comments:
 
 - A decision on issuing more loan guarantees for the Chrysler Corporation is unlikely before Jan. 5 and may not come until after Inauguration Day, Jan. 20. Mr. Miller noted that he was the only member of the three-member Federal Loan Guaranty Board who would leave office on Jan. 20. The two other members are Paul A. Volcker, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, and Elmer B. Staats, the Comptroller General of the United States.
 
 - Mr. Carter will recommend before leaving office that Congress make any 1981 tax relief for individuals effective July 1 or later but that relief for business, in the form of liberalized depreciation allowances, be retroactive to Jan. 1. Without the prospect of retroactivity, Mr. Miller said, business might postpone investments scheduled for the first half of the new year.
 
 - The economy in the fourth quarter of 1980 has been expanding at a brisk annual rate of 4 to 5 percent, a stronger performance than the administration expected. But Mr. Miller acknowledged that the outlook for the early months of 1981 was clouded by the high level of interest rates.
 
 The Treasury chief reacted with undisguised disapproval to the suggestions from the Reagan camp that the new President declare that an ''economic emergency'' exists soon after taking office.
 
 ''There is no emergency that I know of,'' Mr. Miller asserted. He said that he had spoken with his designated successor, Donald T.  Regan, and that they were in agreement.
 
 Mr. Regan told reporters on Thursday that he did not think the new administration should declare an emergency. ''It raises fears of things that I don't think we're in yet,'' he said.
 
 Similarly, Mr. Miller said that ''talk about declaring an economic emergency may be creating that emergency.'' ''It's like yelling fire in a crowded theater,'' the Secretary said. ''It may cause people to react even though there's no fire.'' The suggestion that Mr. Reagan declare that an economic emergency exists came from two Republican members of the House of Representatives, Jack F. Kemp of upstate New York and David A.  Stockman of Michigan, who has been chosen by Mr. Reagan to be budget director.
 
 Mr. Stockman, asked today whether he still thought such a declaration was a good idea, seemed to back away. ''Whether that's the right choice of words, I don't know,'' he said. Mr. Stockman added that the new President had to ''clear a channel'' for fast action by Congress on urgent economic issues. ''I don't know how we're going to phrase this,'' he said.
 
 Edwin Meese 3d, the counsel to Mr. Reagan, said Thursday that the President-elect's advisers were not contemplating ''drastic'' or ''extra-legal steps'' comparable to those in the first 100 days of the Administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt, although he said ''several major executive steps'' were under consideration.
 
 Mr. Miller said, as did Mr. Schultze in a brief interview today, that anticipation of recommendations from the new administration for early tax relief was one reason interest rates had climbed to record levels since the Nov. 4 election. ''The markets have this message,'' Mr. S@c@h@u@l@t@z@e said. ''Don't complain about Carter.''
 
 Both acknowledged, however, that other forces were at work, including increases in oil prices and a tightening of the money supply by the Federal Reserve.
 
 Mr. Miller said that President Carter would recommend to Congress next month that it defer passage of a tax cut until after adoption of a first budget resolution for the fiscal year 1982, which will start next Oct. 1. Such a resolution, to set spending and revenue limits, is supposed to be approved by Congress by May 15, but approval could come later. Doubts on Ability to Cut Spending
 
 Mr. Miller expressed doubt that Mr. Reagan would succeed in cutting spending as much as he would like, either in the fiscal year 1981, which began last Oct. 1, or in his amendments to President Carter's budget for the fiscal year 1982, which is to be submitted to Congress on Jan. 15.
 
 ''I have serious reservations that when it comes down to trying to legislate they're going to get those reductions,'' Mr. Miller said.  ''It's important to put expectations in the realm of realism.''
 
 Mr. Miller, who came to Washington in 1978 as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, seemed to be hinting in extended remarks about monetary policy that he thought it was too tight, but he ignored several requests to give a direct answer to that question.
 
 Mr. Miller was categoric, however, in stating that a Reagan policy of early tax cuts to stimulate the economy would be incompatible with the slow growth of the money supply that the Federal Reserve has been permitting and could ''drive interest rates through the roof.'' Disparity in Fiscal Policies
 
 Interest rates are at record levels now, he said, in part because inflation has been roughly 10 percent and the economy has been expanding this autumn at a rate of 4 percent or more. He contrasted the 14 percent total with the central bank's money-supply growth target of roughly 6 percent, saying that high interest rates were an inevitable result of the disparity.
 
 If the Federal Reserve sticks to its present targets, he said, ''they are in conflict with the fiscal policy announced by the new administration.''
 
 ''There needs to be a harmony'' between credit policy and fiscal stimulus, Mr. Miller said.  The problem, he said, is that when the Federal Reserve tries to wring inflation out of the economy by slowing the rate of money growth, the resulting high interest rates inevitably choke off some economic activity as well.
 
 ''Mr. Reagan's proposals,'' he said, ''seem to be for looseness in fiscal policy because of a willingness to enact tax cuts before spending reductions.'' He added that the Government should have ''a tight rein on fiscal policy so we don't need a Draconian monetary policy.''


ECONOMIC CRISIS (91%); ECONOMIC POLICY (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (90%); PUBLIC FINANCE (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); BUDGETS (79%); GOVERNMENT CONTROLLERS & AUDITORS (79%); ELECTIONS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); TAXES & TAXATION (77%); TAX RELIEF (76%); TAX LAW (76%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (76%); BUDGET DEFICITS (76%); INTEREST RATES (75%); DEPRECIATION (71%); NATIONAL DEBT (71%); CENTRAL BANKS (71%); CHRISTMAS (69%); 
