3S8G-CGX0-000B-Y1J8


The New York Times


PUBLISHING: BOOKSELLERS MAP STRATEGY OF SURVIVAL


19801212T000000Z


AMERICA'S bookstores, from downtown to midtown to the neighborhood shopping mall, are struggling but determined to keep their doors open amid the general economic uncertainty. As a result, hundreds of bookstore owners have been holding what the American Booksellers Association calls ''survival strategy'' sessions in recent months all over the country.
 
 The A.B.A.'s directors, G. Roysce Smith and Robert D. Hale, say that the aim of these regional meetings is nothing less than to make sure that b ookstores stay alive and continue to serve American readers.
 
 Many of the local bookstores were hard hit by the recession, their own rising operating costs (higher rents, for example), increased price tags on books, what they consider harsh conditions set by wholesalers and publishers for buying and returning unsold copies, competition from the big book chains and book clubs and competition from other forms of entertainmment.
 
 Compared to the theater, movies and television, both the Association of American Publishers and the American Booksellers Association point out, even higher-priced books remain a relative bargain: no costly tickets, no dinner out, no parking, no expensive equipment needed, no commercials (that consumers pay for indirectly) -and once a book is bought, it can be read again and again.
 
 At a survival meeting in Chicago, Mr. Hale reports, the booksellers said that an economic threat exists even for those booksellers who are operating their businesses efficiently. One Midwestern bookseller, Donald Barliant, noted that the recession and inflation hurt, but that ''the threat also comes from our suppliers - the publishers.''
 
 Maxwell J. Lil lienstein, general counsel of the A.B.A., writing in the authorita tive American Bookseller, deplores the effect of concentration in the hardcover and mass market paperback fields, saying it har ms the independent bookstore.
 
 Returns are a problem for publishers and bookstores. Traditionally, unsold books can be shipped back to the publisher, causing uncertainty in the areas of printing, stocking and selling. ''Most of the book trade's current problems,'' says Michael Fox, the A.B.A.  education director, ''are directly or indirectly due to the fact that most books are sold on a returnable basis. The solution then is obvious: books should be sold outright, and trade economics should be adjusted accordingly. Returns policies have outlived their usefulness.''
 
 Beginning Jan. 1, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich will break with tradition. It will offer greater discounts - as high as 58 percent, compared with its previous 46 percent high, for large orders of hardcover books - on the condition that books cannot be returned for credit.
 
 William Jovanovich argues that the nonreturn policy will help the independent booksellers and jobbers. He says that by buying ''firm'' at a greater discount, they will avoid handling and freight expenses, be able to mark down retail prices and compete with the chains and discount stores. A prestigious small publisher, Alfred Mayer, president of Overlook Press, agrees that once ''merchandise'' is accepted, sensible business practice is that it should be unreturnable.
 
 Other publishers also are experimenting with revised discounts to avoid the returns problem. It is too soon for the independents to gauge the effects, but the recognition of their plight by publishers is what some booksellers consider a vital part of their survival strategy.
 
 Oscar Dystel, former chairman of the board of Bantam Books and a leading force in the ''paperback revolution,'' gave the annual R.R.  Bowker memorial lecture, named after the periodicals publisher, a few days ago in New York. Among his observations:
 
 ''Today, mass market paperback publishing has invaded the domain of the hardcover publisher. Paperback publishers are producing their own hardcover editions. In turn, the hardcover side may soon invade the mass market by producing its own rack-size paperback editions. Both mass market and hardcover houses can and do sell trade paperbacks effectively, but the mass market houses have the edge and facilities to reach a wider audience.''
 
 Mr. Dystel deplored the growing ''primacy of systems and financial orientation in trade publishing'' because ''those who understand only numbers lack the necessary creative and editorial vision,'' and are incapable of running publishing houses. ''The book is what this business is all about,'' Mr. Dystel added.
 
 The current issue of the quarterly Present Tense is devoted almost entirely to the works of emigre Jewish artists, writers and photographers. The magazine includes a history of Jewish underground publishing in the Soviet Union.
 
 One feature is an interview by Irving Howe, author of ''The World of Our Fathers,'' with Gershom Scholem, the historian and author of ''From Berlin to Jerusalem: Memories of My Youth'' (Schocken Books).  Mr. Scholem, who was born in Germany and lives in Israel, said that Israel has good storytellers but that they lack genius. To which Mr.  Howe replied, ''But genius doesn't grow on trees.''
 
 The magazine's editor, Murray Polner, recently brought the contributors together with American publishers and editors to help them pursue their careers in the United States.


BOOKSTORES (96%); PUBLISHING (90%); RECESSION (89%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); RETAILERS (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); BOOK CLUBS (76%); PRICE INCREASES (74%); WHOLESALERS (74%); LAWYERS (62%); 
