3S8G-CH10-000B-Y1WD


The New York Times


UNREST IN POLAND HURTS MARK


19801211T000000Z


The dollar climbed briefly above two marks in foreign exchange trading this morning, its highest level in more than two years. The United States currency was strengthened by climbing interest rates on dollars and the political and military uncertainties in Poland, Germany's neighbor to the east.
 
 The decline of the mark today, as most other European currencies held their positions against the dollar, may have given the first indication that the uncertainty of events in Poland, especially the specter of Soviet intervention, was having a significant impact on the dollar-mark exchange rate.
 
 On the Frankfurt currency exchange, the dollar briefly touched 2.0010 marks during active trading this morning, although it was fixed later in the day, after central bank intervention, at 1.9993 marks, its highest point since September 1978. Central Bank Intervention Slight
 
 Leonhard Gleske, a Bundesbank board member and the director of the bank's foreign exchange activities, said central bank intervention had been slight, ''simply to insure orderly market conditions.''
 
 Discussing the mark's slide, Mr. Gleske pointed to West Germany's threateningly large balance-of-payments deficit, which is expected to reach the equivalent of $15 billion this year, and the high interest rates in the United States, which lure investors out of marks and into dollar investments.
 
 Major American banks today raised their prime lending rate to 20 percent, tying April's record. The German prime rate, pegged to the international mark rate, is 10 3/4 percent.
 
 In November, the mark's drop against other currencies forced European central banks to support the German currency by buying marks. The French central bank began a series of measures to stop the mark sinking more than 2.5 percent below the French franc, the maximum gap allowed between two currencies in the European Monetary System. Drachma Also Affected
 
 The dollar is also continuing its upward surge against the Greek drachma, rising 12.4 percent over the past 30 days to reach record levels today.
 
 The dollar's trend in Greece stems from the Government's decision early in November to end the drachma's fixed parity to the dollar in the hope of stabilizing it. Dollar banknotes cost 48.3 drachmas today, compared with the 43 drachmas that dollars had fetched under fixed parity, which ended Nov. 10.
 
 The Greek currency will be traded for the first time tomorrow on the Paris foreign exchange market, a move toward its ultimate integration into the monetary system as part of Greece's full membership in the European Economic Community, which takes effect next month. Politics and the Mark
 
 Dieter Wermuth, the chief economist at Citibank in Frankfurt, said, ''The mark is suffering more damage from political conditions than from financial considerations.''
 
 He cited Middle East tensions as one factor. But more significant, he said, was the ''frontline mentality'' created in West Germany by its proximity to Poland: It is feared that a Soviet intervention would upset the West German economy, which is tightly intertwined with the economies of Eastern Europe by trade and credit arrangements.
 
 Earlier this year, a consortium of West German banks reluctantly acceded to Government pressure and assembled credits for Poland worth the equivalent of $603 million.
 
 And a group of West German banks is now negotiating conditions for credits worth $5.02 billion to cover the cost of construction of a gas pipeline from the Soviet Union to Western Europe. The pipeline would be built by a consortium led by West German steel pipe and gas-distribution companies.


INTEREST RATES (91%); ECONOMIC NEWS (91%); CURRENCIES (91%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); CENTRAL BANKS (90%); PRIME RATES (90%); EXCHANGE RATES (90%); GERMAN MARK (89%); BALANCE OF PAYMENTS (78%); TRENDS (77%); 
