3S8G-CH00-000B-Y1RH


The New York Times


The Myth of Declining American Trade


19801211T000000Z


In economics, as in other inexact sciences, there is a temptation to move from the specific to the general and to err in the process.  Consider all the current gloomy talk about the failure of American industry to compete successfully abroad. Even a leading New York banker has said America's share of world trade is shrinking. And justifiable concern about the condition of one or another heavy industry has been loosely misread as a loss of competitiveness in all world markets. It's not surprising to hear many people urging Washington to do something drastic.
 
 But the truth is that as the dollar declined in relation to other industrial currencies, the price of American exports has become more competitive and sales abroad have been improving. There is no need for disguised subsidies or new financing mechanisms to boost exports.
 
 The obvious problems that have beset autos, steel and a few other industries are exceptions, not the rule. Generally speaking, American business is beating the competition in textiles, machinery, computers, chemicals, agriculture, even shoes. Penetration by American exports has been so strong that some Europeans are now lamenting, sotto voce, their own competitive decline. Then what accounts for the myth of American export failures?
 
 One big reason is a statistical blindness caused by the rapid climb in the cost of OPEC oil. The oil import bill is exceeding $80 billion; last year it helped to produce a net deficit of $29 billion in total trade. But the price of oil does not in any sense derive from any shameful failure of American competitive zeal. On the contrary, growing American exports have held down the OPEC damage.  Other segments of the American economy, notably agribusiness, have vastly improved their earnings abroad. Without these improvements, the $29-billion deficit would have been twice as large.
 
 Another form of statistical confusion has helped inflate the myth of enfeebled American trade. There has been a persistent failure, even by Commerce officials, to adjust dollar figures for inflation.  So according to their raw data, the American share of world exports has declined almost continuously since 1960. But a Treasury study that corrects for inflation shows that the decline st opped in the 70's - and th at the American share has grown since 1978.
 
 America's trade prospects abroad can also be understood in other ways - by comparison with costs in Europe and Japan. By that standard also, the United States has been gaining. Indexes kept by the International Monetary Fund show how prices and costs compare in 13 industrial countries and, by inference, how these countries can be expected to fare competitively. West Germany and Japan have lost ground in the last decade. Compared with the United States, average wholesale prices rose 21 percent faster elsewhere. And labor costs per unit of output increased 40 percent faster.
 
 None of this means that it's easy to compete. But the data do cast doubt on the calls for extraordinary Government action to meet some emergency. American exporters will benefit from the prudent changes in taxes and regulatory policy that are planned by the next Administration for the benefit of all business. But beyond those, there seems no need for grand new subsidy programs and emergency financing facilities - or excessive concern about foreign trade.


EXPORT PRICES (90%); EXPORT TRADE (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); CURRENCIES (89%); CARTELS (89%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (89%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (88%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (77%); WHOLESALE PRICES (76%); PETROLEUM EXPORTS & IMPORTS (76%); IMPORT TRADE (76%); PRICE INCREASES (74%); PRICE CHANGES (74%); EXPORT & IMPORT LAW (74%); OIL & GAS PRICES (74%); EXPORT PROMOTION (74%); OIL & GAS EXPORTS & IMPORTS (74%); AGRICULTURAL CHEMICALS (72%); AGRICULTURE (72%); COMPANY EARNINGS (69%); 
