3S8G-CJ10-000B-Y4JV


The New York Times


CHEMICAL CONCERNS IN GERMANY LAGGING


19801204T000000Z


West Germany's giant chemical concerns, traditionally among the country's most profitable companies, are feeling signs of strain as the continuing economic slowdown in Europe and America cuts production, drives up costs and pares profits.
 
 BASF, Hoechst and Bayer, the world's largest chemical companies, all reported a substantial slump in sales and earnings in the third quarter that the companies said will depress results for the year and may be a harbinger of things to come.
 
 The dismal performance was the result of slackened demand, as users emptied inventories they stocked earlier this year when they anticipated that oil price increases would drive up the cost of chemicals. The companies were also hurt by reduced demand from industries adversely affected by the recession, such as automobiles, textiles and the building trades.
 
 Drops in North America
 
 The companies were saved from disaster by orders from abroad, as sales in the European market, including West Germany, went down. But they also reported severe declines in North America, where they have inve sted heavily since the war, and where the United States slwodown cut sharply into their results.
 
 The companies complained of tough competition against United States producers in several product areas, above all fibers and plastics, where they say American producers underbid them because of the lower price for chemical feedstock in the United States.
 
 ''What hurt us most was insufficient exhaustion of capacity in our plants,'' Matthias Seefelder, chairman of BASF, complained at the company's annual news conference last week. ''That led to an increase in production costs. At the same time we had to digest drastic increases in the cost of raw materials.''
 
 BASF, the No. 1 company, was hit the hardest. In the first three quarters of this year its profits dropped 16.9 percent, to $587 million, on sales of $11.4 billion, an increase of 7.4 percent.  Second-ranked Hoechst said its earnings dropped 5.9 percent, to $603 million, on sales of $11.3 billion, an increase of 11.7 percent.  Bayer, the smallest of the three, but still larger than E.I. Du Pont de Nemours & Company, America's leading chemical company, said its earnings were off 10.9 percent, to $543 million, on sales of $11.1.  billion, a rise of 10.2 percent. Inventories Accumulated
 
 The results shocked the industry, which went into 1980 on the tail end of a boom that began when the effects of the last oil crisis wore off in 1978 and 1979. All three companies said demand remained strong until about April, when it began to decline.
 
 ''We're accustomed to a summer slowdown,'' commented Bayer's chairman, Herbert Grunewald, reporting his company's results in late November. ''But this year it was longer than ever. It lasted from May to September and reflected not only the start of the recession but also the fact that our customers were cleaning out built-up inventories.'' Results in the various product sectors were mixed. Highly refined products, suc h as pharmaceuticals, sold well, as did agricultural products, suc h as pesticides and fertilizers. But all three companiesreported a sh arp fall in demand for organic chemicals, plastics, fibers and dy estuffs, reflecting the fall in productivity in industries su ch as automobiles and textiles.
 
 Ironically, the United States base all three companies developed in recent years did little to ease the situation. The economic slowdown in the United States preceded Europe's, and results of the three companies in the United States were as bad as in Europe or even worse. Investing in U.S.
 
 Industry leaders acknowledge that there is little sign as yet that the market is reviving. Their hope is that as America moves out of its recession, it will act as a locomotive and pull Europe along. In anticipation of an upturn, they are investing against the business cycle.
 
 Much of that investing is being done in the United States. The European chemical pie has been cut up, they argue, and in the emerging nations of the third world there is no money. But the United States has a large and relatively healthy market, lower production costs and less expensive stocks of raw materials.
 
 Hoechst, which plans to invest the equivalent of $1.1 billion in 1981, said it would invest 12 percent of it in the United States.  Bayer will spend close to $1.2 billion next year, $250 million of it in America.


CHEMICALS (91%); CHEMICALS MFG (91%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); COMPANY PROFITS (90%); RECESSION (89%); COMPANY EARNINGS (89%); ECONOMIC DECLINE (78%); CHEMICALS SECTOR PERFORMANCE (78%); COMMODITY CHEMICALS INDUSTRY (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); ANNUAL FINANCIAL RESULTS (77%); OIL & GAS PRICES (77%); FINANCIAL RESULTS (77%); PRICE INCREASES (75%); TEXTILES (69%); RANKINGS (63%); 
