3S8G-CJY0-000B-Y1MS


The New York Times


GAIN IN PRODUCTIVITY LESS THAN ESTIMATE


19801127T000000Z


Business productivity rose in the third quarter but less than was first estimated, the Labor Department said today. This could mean more bad news about inflation.
 
 The department also reported that the real earnings of families with at least one wage earner fell 4.2 percent during the last year.  The productivity of all private business, the Labor Department said, rose at an annual rate of three-tenths of 1 percent in the third quarter. The increase was originally estimated in October at 1.4 percent.
 
 The rise was in contrast to six previous quarterly declines in productivity, but it appeared modest - particularly with the nation's economy emerging from the sharp, though apparently short, recession.
 
 ''The whole thing is very disappointing,'' said Sandra Shaber, a senior economist at Chase Econometrics Associates in Bala Cynwyd, Pa. ''We should have had much bigger gains in overall productivity if we are in a real live recovery.''
 
 Robert Gough, vice president of Data Resources Inc., said past recoveries had been marked by much larger productivity gains.  Overall business productivity declined at annual rates of threetenths of 1 percent and 2.7 percent during the previous two quarters. In the Nonfinancial Sector
 
 The Labor Department, in an initial report, said that productivity among nonfinancial corporations jumped at a 4.7 percent annual rate in the third quarter, its first increase since late 1978 and the largest in five years. Six-tenths of 1 percent of the increase resulted from rising output and the rest from declining work hours.
 
 ''That's not an optimistic picture at all, despite the overall positive number,'' Mr. Gough commented. The nonfinancial sector covers about two-thirds of all businesses. It excludes banks, finance companies, brokerage firms and insurance companies.
 
 The Labor Department also reported that productivity among nonfarm businesses increased at an annual rate of only 1.5 percent from July 1 through Sept. 30, down from its preliminary estimate of 2.6 percent.
 
 The productivity performance of manufacturers, meanwhile, proved better than first believed - declining at an annual rate of seventenths of 1 percent rather than the previously reported 2.7 percent, the department said.
 
 ''That's only less bad,'' Miss Shaber said. ''If we had better productivity gains in manufacturing, it would have a moderating effect on inflation. We're not getting that.'' Factories' 4th Straight Drop
 
 The productivity decline for manufacturers is their fourth quarterly drop in a row and the longest continuous falloff since 1955-56.
 
 Productivity is a measure of how many goods and services are produced in one hour of paid work. Increasing productivity helps to offset rising labor costs and tempers inflation at the retail level.  But consumer prices, despite the recession, have accelerated at a 12.2 percent annual rate so far this year, not much less than last year's 13.3 percent.
 
 The Labor Department said median earnings of working families rose 8 percent, to $412 a week, in the last 12 months. During the same period, however, prices rose 12.8 percent. Median earnings of individuals who worked f ull time rose 9.4 percent over the year, to $266 a week, but af ter adjusting for rising prices their real earnings fell 3 perc ent, the department said. The median is the figure at which half the population is above and the other half is below. Because of the m ethod of computing the figures, the decline in real earnings is not a simple subtraction of the wage increase from the consumer price inc rease.


PRODUCTIVITY; UNITED STATES ECONOMY  PRODUCTIVITY (94%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (90%); STATISTICS (90%); RECESSION (89%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); CONSUMER PRICE INDEX (78%); MANUFACTURING SECTOR PERFORMANCE (77%); INSURANCE (72%); BANKING & FINANCE (71%); 
