3S8G-CFX0-000B-Y427


The New York Times


CONSUMER LOANS READILY AVAILABLE AGAIN


19801219T000000Z


To the relief of consumers urgently in need of financing for new cars, home improvements and other expenses, money is readily for rent again in New York State.
 
 But the sharply higher allowable new interest rates and charges that have attracted banks back into the lending business as of this month will also mean bigger monthly bills and potential hardships for many credit customers, especially low-income buyers of furniture and appliances on time through finance companies.
 
 There has been no immediate rush to take advantage of the newly reopened credit pipeline, according to bankers and consumer representatives, nor has there been any buying surge by consumers prefering to make credit-card purchases under the old rates.
 
 With the State Legislature's removal last month of longtime ceilings on interest rates, a typical borrower who takes out a threeyear, $6,000 auto loan will end up repaying $220 a month instead of $204, or $576 more over the life of the loan. It is the difference between the previous annual interest rate of 13.38 percent and the 18 percent rate now charged by many banks.
 
 $2,200 More on $10,000 Loan
 
 A typical borrower who takes out a $10,000 five-year homeimprovement loan will pay $2,200 more, reflecting the difference between the former 11.96 percent and the current 19 percent. The rates can vary from bank to bank.
 
 Low-income consumers will be hit harder, typically paying rates of more than 20 percent now for finance-company loans and even higher rates for time purchases of already inflated home furnishings, according to consumer officials.
 
 The 18 percent and 19 percent rate is still two or three percentage points below the prime rate, which banks charge their best corporate customers. The reason consumers do better, at least for the moment, is that their borrowing rates are set for a longer term. Businesses may pay a higher rate today, but it can be adjusted downward any time market conditions warrant.
 
 In addition, bankers and consumer officials say, the substantial deregulation of interest rates and the competition it should excite between banks can be expected to alter the forms of consumer banking dramatically, with more services carrying individual charges that banks may waive for better customers. Shopping for a Bank
 
 ''The consumer has now got to put banking on his shopping list,'' said James Flynn, a spokesman for the Marine Midland Bank, suggesting that customers would shop for the best deals at banks as they do now for soda or cuts of meat. A campaign to encourage this was announced yesterday by the State Banking Department.
 
 ''We're advising people to treat banking like any other commodity,'' said Lee Berry, a spokesman for the New York State Consumer Protection Board. He predicted that growing competition among banks would give consumers a chance to bargain over terms in a kind of credit marketplace.
 
 The developments were set in motion Nov. 23 by the Legislature's approval at a special session of a major banking-deregulation bill long sought by the industry. Banks had complained that inflation had made their cost of borrowing higher than what they were allowed to earn by lending and so they would lose money with every loan.  Eventually, they dramatically cut back lending with the exception of home mortgages, which were decontrolled by Federal action earlier this year.
 
 The state bill lifted longstanding civil usury limits on annual interest rates that banks and other lenders could charge for various forms of consumer loans and credit and increased the size of allowable loans. Interest rates on most personal and installment loans and revolving credit lines such as overdraft checking, for example, had been limited to 11 to 13 percent a year. Outstanding credit-card balances were charged at the rate of 18 percent a year on the first $500 and 12 percent on the remainder. Usury Limit Is 25%
 
 Now the only limit that remains is the criminal usury limit of 25 percent interest a year, designed to curb loan sharking. Although the bank rates could jump to this figure, there would still be enough difference between 25 percent annual interest and the 5 percent a week loan sharks charge, law-enforcement officials say, to make dealing with a bank preferable.
 
 The interest ceilings on loans with fixed repayment schedules ended Dec. 1. The ceilings on credit-card balances and revolving credit lines expire Jan. 1, but cardholders must receive 30 days' notice of a rate rise. On Wednesday, Citibank announced a $15 annual fee for its Visa and MasterCard credit cards starting Jan. 1 for new cardholders and Jan. 19 for existing customers, while raising the interest rate on unpaid balances to 19.8 percent starting Jan. 19.  Other banks are expected to follow, but with lower rates.
 
 In place of the ceilings lifted Dec. 1, most banks have settled on new annual interest rates of 17 percent for secured loans to 19 percent for unsecured personal loans. Outstanding loans or credit balances predating the lifting of the ceilings are charged at the old rate.
 
 Because the ceilings have been off only a few days, bankers and consumer officials say it is too early to judge any effects. ''We haven't been getting any flood of applications,'' said Charles Lehing, senior vice president of the Chemical Bank. ''People are getting worried about borrowing money. But at this time of the year, it slows anyway.''


INTEREST RATES (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); CONSUMER LENDING (90%); COMMERCIAL BANKING (89%); BANKING & FINANCE (89%); DEREGULATION (89%); CONSUMER LAW (78%); LOW INCOME PERSONS (78%); HOME IMPROVEMENT (78%); RETAIL BANKING (78%); AUTOMOBILE FINANCING (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); CONSUMER PROTECTION (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); 
