3S8G-CFX0-000B-Y41S


The New York Times


BUSINESS DIGEST;FRIDAY, DECEMBER 19, 1980;Companies


19801219T000000Z


Delta awarded Pratt and Whitney Aircraft a $600 million order to produce engines for the 60 Boeing 757 jets it recently ordered. The order was the largest contract in airline history for a single type of commercial engine. Pratt and Whitney contended that its engine would allow $1 million in fuel savings annually on each 757 jet, compared with fuel costs of competing General Electric and Rolls-Royce engines. Those two companies disputed the assertion.  (Page A1.)
 
 Chase Manhattan Bank will charge an 18 percent annual rate on credit-card debts and a $15 fee for its Visa cards. The bank's announcement, which came a day after Citibank said it would charge an annual rate of 19.8 percent, may be the opening volley in a banking price war. Other major New York banks have not yet announced strategies they would use following recent changes in New York State banking law changes that allow higher interest rates. (D1.)
 
 Paine Webber Inc. said it lost $7.6 million in its fourth quarter on revenues of $220 million. It also reported a $6.9 million fiscalyear loss on revenues of $896 million. Saying that these losses represented the final reckoning of its costs of merging a year ago with Blyth Eastman Dillon & Company, Donald B. Marron, president, predicted the firm would turn a profit for the current quarter. (D1.)
 
 Interpace has offered to acquire Curtiss-Wright in a $360 million stock transaction under which the latter would become a subsidiary of Interpace. Kennecott has recently been trying to acquire the unwilling Curtiss-Wright. (D4.)
 
 Korvettes has sold the lease to its 45th Street store to a real-estate developer for $3.5 million, and is studying the possibility of continuing operations as a discount chain of 11 or so stores, according to Joseph A. Ris, chairman, The 45th Street store is expected to be razed and an office building erected. (D5.) The Economy
 
 The third-quarter current account had a $4.9 billion surplus, the largest since 1975 and the first in a year, the Commerce Department said. It nearly brought the U.S. current account into balance for the first three quarters of 1980 and ''virtually assures'' a surplus for the year, which would be the first since 1976, the department said.  (D1.)
 
 Consumer loans are available again in New York State for such items are cars and home improvements following recent changes in state banking laws, but their interest rates are sharply higher. The rise may pose hardships for many credit customers. (D3.) International
 
 The International Monetary Fund will subsidize interest costs incurred by some poor countries that borrow from it. Under a plan proposed by the I.M.F.'s executive board, poor nations, now paying 11.5 percent interest, may have as much as 3 percentage points shaved from their interest charges. (D1.)
 
 Real prices for energy worldwide will rise 50 percent by the year 2000 and that inflation-adjusted increase will foster energy conservation, the Exxon Corporation predicted in its World Energy Outlook. It also projected that growth in demand would slip 2 1/2 percent annually over the next two decades, that supplies would increasingly be derived from energy sources other than oil and that oil production would reach a plateau shortly after the turn of the century. (D4.) Markets
 
 Trading volume soared to 69.6 million shares, the fifth heaviest turnover on the New York Stock Exchange, as investors bought in expectation of a cresting in interest rates. The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 930.20, up 1.70 points, after running ahead nearly 14 1/2 at 2 P.M. Utility and bank stocks were strong, but the advance of energy issues was blunted. (D1.) Yields in the credit markets dropped, also reflecting the belief that rates are peaking. (D9.)
 
 The dollar slipped in European trading but rose later in New York against most major currencies except the Canadian dollar. The price of gold fell in major markets and was quoted by Republic National Bank at $571, down $5. (D10.) Prices in commodities markets were mostly lower in quiet pre-holiday trading. (D10.) Today's Columns
 
 Higher growth and lower inflation may be promoted by supply-side measures to raise capital formation, cut costs and reduce price-wage rigidities if those measures are buttressed by prudent demand-side easing of the tax burden. Economic Scene. (D2.)
 
 Shareholders of the American Financial Corporation moved quickly to challenge the company's recent plan to buy out public shareholders.  But tactics used in such suits pose questions about who stands to gain more from class actions: the shareholders or their attorneys.  Market Place. (D6.)


BANKING & FINANCE (90%); AIRCRAFT ENGINES (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); INTEREST RATES (89%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); OIL & GAS PRICES (77%); REAL ESTATE (76%); BANKING LAW (75%); PRICE CUTTING (75%); CREDIT CARDS (75%); BANKING & FINANCE REGULATION (75%); COMPANY PROFITS (72%); CONSUMER LENDING (70%); PERSONAL DEBT (70%); COMMERCIAL RENTAL PROPERTY (68%); COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS (66%); DISCOUNT & CLUB STORES (63%); 
