3S8G-CGH0-000B-Y0K5


The New York Times


PRESIDENT REAGAN'S RECESSION?


19801214T000000Z


WASHINGTON I N less than two months, the tint on the economic horizon has faded from rosy to gray. The seemingly relentless upward march of interest rates - the prime rate at 20 percent and the yield on 30-year Treasury bonds over 13 percent for the first time - is pulling the economy down into a second dip that analysts are likely to regard as a continuation of the steep business recession that began in the first half of 1980.
 
 From the inner circles of the Carter Administration to the counting houses of Wall Street, most economists say the first quarter of 1981 is going to show little or no growth and possibly an overall contraction in America's total outpouring of goods and services.
 
 President-elect Ronald Reagan has received from two Republican Representatives a dramatically grim warning that the coming months will bring a slowdown in consumer and investment spending, rising unemployment, a credit crunch and perturbation in financial markets, and soaring Federal credit demands to finance a rising budget deficit and expanding ''off-budget'' programs.
 
 The authors, Representatives Jack F. Kemp of western New York and David A. Stockman of Michigan, urged Mr. Reagan to move quickly and decisively to end oil price controls, reduce Federal spending, sponsor tax relief and block the imposition of new Federal regulations on business. Mr. Stockman has been selected as Mr.  Reagan's director of the Office of Management and Budget.
 
 Shorn of its dramatic language, theKemp-Stockman memorandum is only a little more pessimistic about the economic outlook than are most conservative forecasters.
 
 Alan Greenspan, the economist who has been a campaign and transition adviser to Mr. Reagan, said that there was evidence that ''we are going to stall out in a matter of weeks'' and that the first quarter of 1981 would ''be zero,'' - that is, show no significant rise or fall of total economic activity.
 
 Asked what policy implications that might have for the Reagan administration, Mr. Greenspan replied: ''The administration will focus on longer-term economic problems. I don't think the short-term economic problems will significantly alterthat path - nor should it.'' As of the last week of November, Mr.  Greenspan said, the measures of employment and industrial activity used by his economic consulting firm, Townsend-Greenspan, showed ''the economy is still rising.'' But sa les of houses were slipping and businessmen were reporting that new order s were sliding in late November. ''It will catch up with output this month or next,'' he said.
 
 For President-elect Reagan, there are political benefits and headaches in the prospect of a weaker economy this winter. If the unemployment rate - the most politically sensitive indicator - moves up, Mr. Reagan will run into more resistance to his expected proposals to economize byshrinking drastically, or eliminating altogether, the jobs and manpower training programs under the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act, or CETA. But higher unemployment would give Mr. Reagan a talking point in his quest for across-the-board individual income tax cuts. The Democrats are expected to argue that such tax relief would stimulate consumption when what the country needs most is more savings and investment.
 
 Conversely, if unemployment is steady or improving, Mr. Reagan will find it harder to defend his tax proposal and especially difficult to insist that the Congress legislate three consecutive tax cuts in a single bill, a Republican campaign promise. The three-year bill is sponsored by Senator William V. Roth Jr. of Delaware and Representative Kemp.
 
 Mr. Reagan is expected to propose such a tax bill but how hard he will fight for it remains to be seen. The Democrats, who still control the House, dislike writing three years of tax relief in one bill.
 
 In the Senate, where the Republicans will hold sway, Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican who will head the Finance Committee, has said that in his opinion one year's tax relief would suffice and a threeyear bill would ''fuel inflation.''
 
 Surprisingly, a contrary view was voiced last week by Barry P.  Bosworth of the Brookings Institution, who in 1977-79 was Mr.  Carter's first wage-price monitor. ''I just don't believe Kemp-Roth will lead to a n explosion of inflation,'' Mr. Bosworth said in an interview. '' It will lead to a big increase in interest rates becausethe Federal R eserve won't accommodate a big increase in demand.''
 
 A LTHOUGH most economists agree that the first quarter will be lackluster, there is less agreement on whether the second quarter is likely to mark the start of a genuine recovery. The most important variable, the analysts say, is how much interest rates decline this winter. In any event, the standard view is that the recovery, when it comes, will be anemic.
 
 ''It's going to be sloppy,'' comments Stephen M. Goldfeld, the Princeton economist who is serving a short hitch as a member of President Carter's Council of Economic Advisers. Mr. Goldfeld observed that in a typical post-World War II recovery from a recession, the economy had expanded by 7 1/2 percent a year after the trough.
 
 By contrast, Mr. Goldfeld said, before the latest run-up of interest rates the expectation was for a snapback of only 2 1/2 to 3 percent. With credit now dearer than virtually all analysts anticipated a few months ago, the first half of 1981 could show virtually no overall gains, he indicated.
 
 As expected, high credit costs are hurting sales of long-lived assets, notably houses and cars. Sales of new one-family houses, after climbing in May, June and July, skidded in August, September and October. Housing starts in October were barely a whisker higher than in September; the number of permits issued tumbled 15 percent, a sign that fewer houses would be started in the future.
 
 The general expectation is that housing, cars and nonresidential construction - early victims of dear money -will pull down other sectors. Yet, there are seemingly recession-proof sectors in the economy - commercial aircraft, defense, computers, oil and gas drilling - and the labor markets have shown remarkable strength. The number of initial claims for unemployment insurance has been declining steadily for several months, and by late November it was back down to 375,000, its mid-February level. The national unemployment rate edged down to 7.5 percent last month.
 
 How much high interest rates may hurt investment spending in 1981 may not be known for a while. The Commerce Department reported last week that nonfarm businesses, in line with earlier plans, expected to increase capital outlays by 5.3 percent in the first quarter and by an additional 4.3 percent in the June quarter.
 
 But ''the reports came in before the most recent surge in interest rates,'' an official said. ''We just don't know what impact that might have.''
 
 There was no sign of a ''second leg'' of recession in the retail sales figures just released. The Commerce Department revised its preliminary October figure upward to show a rise of five-tenths of 1 percent and said early returns for November pointed to a further gain of 1.6 percent. The two months taken together seemed to show a small gain in real terms after allowing for inflation. Unless interest rates are seen by Congress and the public as falling swiftly in the context of a flat or c ontracting economy, Mr. Reagan's paramount economic policy issue may be monetary policy and the independence of the Federal Reserve.
 
 With wage gains now approaching 10 percent a year, few analysts are optimistic that inflation will slow down, even if the economy turns softer. Most nervously raise the specter of a new explosion of oil prices as a result of continuation of the Iraq-Iran war. The analysts were mindful that the 1974 and 1979 price jumps grew out of political events - a war against Israel, a revolution against the Shah.
 
 Mr. Bosworth and other Carter economists have favored a tight budget policy - tighter than the actuality in the last two years - to avoid what they feared would be a savage tightening of the credit screws. In their view, that fear has been realized.
 
 So long as double-digit inflation persists, Mr. Bosworth said, the Federal Reserve ''won't finance any expansion'' of the economy. Mr.  Bosworth said this more in sorrow than in criticism. ''Given the Federal Reserve Board's responsibility, it has no choice,'' he commented. ''It's probably right. There is a danger of an explosion of inflationary pressures.''


INTEREST RATES (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (90%); RECESSION (90%); BUDGETS (90%); PUBLIC FINANCE (90%); PRIME RATES (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (89%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); CREDIT CRISIS (78%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (78%); BONDS (78%); MANUFACTURING OUTPUT (77%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (75%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); CONSERVATISM (73%); BUDGET DEFICITS (73%); BANKING & FINANCE (72%); TREASURY SECURITIES (72%); TAXES & TAXATION (69%); TAX RELIEF (65%); TAX LAW (65%); CONSULTING SERVICES (64%); 
