3S8G-CHW0-000B-Y44H


The New York Times


ABOUT REAL ESTATE;CHANGE IN HOUSING SUBSIDIES IS EXPECTED


19801205T000000Z


Whatever else a Reagan administration does about housing issues affecting the cities, it is likely to seek a change in the way housing subsidies are used. Interestingly, there is wide agreement among housing specialists with both Republican and Democratic backgrounds that change is needed.
 
 The basic problem is that the long-term costs have grown astoundingly high for providing new or substantially rehabilitated housing for low-income people under a key program that the Republicans first put into effect in the Nixon Administration. Not only that, it is possible to accomplish many of the same housing objectives at far lower cost by different means.
 
 Essentially what such cities as New York seek to do through housing subsidies is preserve and improve existing neighborhoods and housing stock. This is quite different from the main objective of a generation ago: building new housing for poorer people who could not afford new market-rate housing.
 
 Accordingly, when the low-income rent subsidies known as Section 8 are used to provide new housing in the cities, the results are frequently out of phase with the cities' own policy goal. But when the subsidy is used to aid existing housing, as it also is in New York, it assists a preservationist strategy. In certain situations, new housing might also serve such a strategy.
 
 Koch administration housing officials suggest that the current authorized level of 2,500 to 3,000 new or substantially rehabilitated Section 8 units a year is too high a number in a sensibly devised ''housing mix'' for the city. A bigger share of that money should be flowing into the existing housing stock through other programs, they contend. One is the participation loan program, in which a private lender pays roughly half the cost of the housing rehabilitation, financed at m arket interest rates, and the Government pays the rest with a 1 perc ent loan. Another Reagan administration direction may be toward programs advancing urban owner-occupancy. Representati ve S. William Green, Republican of Manhattan, a former regional ad ministrator of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, was instrumental a few months ago in encouraging H.U.D. to publish n ew regulations allowing the use of so-called Section 235 subsidies in conversions of rental units to cooperatives and condominiums.
 
 So far the funds are not available to put the program into effect.  But eventually it may enable families earning up to 95 percent of median income in their region (currently about $23,500 for a family of four in the New York area) to buy their apartment with a belowmarket-rate loan.
 
 The Section 8 program's fall from grace as an instrument of new housing production is explained by some numbers. In the early 1970's the Government was paying an average $4,000 a year in annual rent subsidies for each family housed. Now it is paying about $5,000 a year. In New York the current annual subsidy construction is about $7,000 or $8,000 a family.
 
 In New York, a Section 8 ''gut'' rehabilitation currently costs about $55,000 an apartment. Remove Section 8 procedures and requirements, and the total rehabilitation of a vacant building can be achieved for $32,000 to $33,000 an apartment, according to the New York City Community Preservation Corporation, a bank-financed mortgage lender that concentrates on improving occupied buildings but has done a few vacant ones as a test.
 
 The housing that emerges is comparable, but the rental subsidy requirement is not. Because costs were lower, far more families can afford the housing without paying more than 25 percent of their income as rent. Union wages were paid for the construction, but bloated middleman fees were avoided. Expensive changes in interior layouts were forgone, and existing structural elements were used where possible.
 
 The private builder had a stake in keeping costs down - it could result in higher profit - which contractors lack in Section 8 projects. In Section 8 projects, the developer's incentive is largely the sale of tax losses. The tendency is to ''bring the job in'' at no less than the cost that H.U.D. had previously approved for comparable projects.
 
 Using participation loans, said Michael Lappin, president of the Community Preservation Corporation and a former city housing official, vacant buildings were renovated in Washington Heights and in Brooklyn with rent requirements of $80 to $90 a room per month, meaning that it could be afforded by families of four earning about $16,000 a year. In the Section 8 program, families of four earning up to $19,000 a year are eligible to rent.
 
 Most Community Preservation Corporation financing is done in occupied buildings. In Washington Heights and Inwood alone, C.P.C.  has financed improvements in 5 percent of the total housing stock - 90 buildings - over the last few years.
 
 In current production rents are coming out at about $75 a room per month, which all but about 15 percent of the occupants can pay without additional Section 8 subsidies.


HOUSING ASSISTANCE (92%); REAL ESTATE (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); HOUSING AUTHORITIES (90%); URBAN DEVELOPMENT (90%); RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); PUBLIC HOUSING (90%); HOME PRICES (89%); RENTAL PROPERTY (89%); FAMILY (89%); RESIDENTIAL CO-OWNERSHIP (78%); CITIES (78%); CONDOMINIUMS (78%); POOR POPULATION (78%); LOW COST HOUSING SCHEMES (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (77%); LOW INCOME PERSONS (76%); PERSONAL & FAMILY INCOME (76%); RESIDENTIAL COOPERATIVES (73%); RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUMS (73%); HOME IMPROVEMENT (73%); BUILDING RENOVATION (69%); INTEREST RATES (68%); AVERAGE EARNINGS (63%); 
