3S8G-CJX0-000B-Y1JX


The New York Times


TO KEEP A LIVABLE CITY, A PLACE TO GO FOR FACTS


19801127T000000Z


ABROWNSTONE dweller wants to restore his stoop; a Dutch architect needs information on low-cost housing and urban renewal projects in New York City; a writer is looking for historical background on the design of 42d Street. Each of them received help from the Information Exchange.
 
 The exchange is a reference center and a clearinghouse for materials dealing with the preservation and improvement of the urban environment. It has been open since August at the Urban Center, in the newly restored north wing of the Villard Houses, at Madison Avenue and 51st Street.
 
 According to its director, Darlene McCloud, ''about 50 information requests a week'' are handled, primarily from New Yorkers who are concerned about improving their physical surroundings.
 
 The exchange library of books, periodicals, reports, technical notes and plans has been drawn from more than 1,000 sources, ranging from architects to Government agencies. The material covers the urban landscape not only in New York but also across the nation and abroad. It is constantly updated by the eight-member staff, which handles the varied requests from both professionals and laymen.
 
 ''We are a referral service and always try to provide information - even if we don't have exactly what is wanted,'' said Miss McCloud.  Whether it is a future bride looking for a vest-pocket park in which to hold her wedding or someone seeking an architect to redesign a home, many people don't know where to start the search.
 
 ''The exchange can at least help them get on the right track,'' she said.  The staff does not provide specific names to those seeking architects or contractors; wary of recommending one company over another, they instead refer seekers to an organization, such as the American Institute of Landscape Architects, which could better handle such requests. For restoration products, such as hardware or lighting, the exchange provides a list of likely sources but does not recommend a specific product or store. The exchange is part of the Municipal Arts Society, a private, nonprofit foundation committed to keeping the physical environment ofNew York City livable. In the planning for tw o years, it was organized to provide a centralized source of information at a time of growing interest in preservation and resto ration.
 
 In addition to answering queries from callers and visitors, the exchange sponsors monthly seminars and film screenings. It is open free to the public Monday through Friday, 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. For information, call 935-3960.


COMPANY AND ORGANIZATION PROFILES  HOUSING ASSISTANCE (90%); WRITERS (90%); CITY LIFE (90%); URBAN DEVELOPMENT (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); ARCHITECTURAL SERVICES (89%); LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE SERVICES (78%); LOW COST HOUSING SCHEMES (78%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (76%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (65%); FOUNDATIONS (61%); 
