3S8G-CJ40-000B-Y507


The New York Times


3 BANKS RAISE RATES ON CONSUMER LOANS


19801202T000000Z


Three major New York banks raised the interest rates they charge on consumer installment loans, such as automobile loans, by as much as six percentage po ints yesterday, when the new state law that eliminated usury ceilings on such loans came into effect.
 
 Citibank, the Chemical Bank and the Marine Midland Bank were among those that posted higher, though varying, rates. These ranged from 17 to 19 percent, up from the the former usury ceilings of 12 to 13 1/2 percent.
 
 The higher rates will apply only to new installment loans, and not to loans outstanding before Dec. 1. For loans drawn against revolving credit lines and credit cards, the new law, signed by Governor Carey Nov. 26, takes effect Jan. 1.
 
 Some Delay Posting New Rates
 
 Some major banks, such as the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company, and some large retailers, such as Macy's, delayed posting new rates, saying the old rates would be maintained for now. The Chase Manhattan Bank said it had not yet decided on the rates it would charge, but a spokesman said that they would rise about three percentage points.
 
 The Beneficial Finance Corporation has raised its installment loan rates to 23 percent across the board from 18 percent, according to David B. Ward, senior vice president. Because of the usury ceilings under civil law, however, Beneficial had not been making loans in New York. Moreover, it had been closing its offices in the state, Mr.  Ward said. With the usury ceilings removed, Beneficial has stopped closing offices and has resumed making loans in New York, he added.
 
 Mr. Ward said only Michigan and Texas now had usury laws that created serious obstacles to lending by consumer finance companies.  In most states where there are usury laws, consumer finance c ompanies are permitted to charge more than banks. Generally, the finance compa nies lend to poorer credit risks.
 
 The Household Finance Corporation said it would make its decision later this week. A spokesman indicated that the company was still concerned about New York's criminal usury ceiling of 25 percent, which continues in effect. He said highest interest rate charged anywhere by Household was 36 percent.
 
 With the removal of ceilings on the interest rates banks and other lenders can charge consumers, New Yorkers may want to consider the rates charged in neighboring states.
 
 In New Jersey, usury ceilings still prohibit banks from charging more than 12 percent on most consumer installment loans, according to Frank B. Allen Jr., president of the Maplewood Bank and Trust Company. Mr. Allen said New York residents could borrow from his bank at the 12 percent rate ''if they have a banking relationship with us and are creditworthy.''
 
 In Connecticut, where there are no usury laws on bank loans, the State National Bank charges 15 1/2 to 16 percent on automobile loans, according to Emanuele Terenzio, first vice president. The rate depends on whether the car is new or used and on the amount and size of the credit, Mr. Terenzio said. On most unsecured loans, State National charges 17 percent. Rates Differ at Each Bank
 
 In New York, rates were different at each of the banks that quoted their new, higher rates. Citibank posted the highest overall rate. It will charge 18 percent on secured loans, mainly to finance purchases of automobiles, and 19 percent on unsecured installment loans.
 
 At Chemical, rates on secured installment loans were set at 17 percent, and on unsecured loans at 19 percent. Marine Midland set the rate on all installment loans at 18 percent.
 
 Thus, an individual shopping at these three banks for an auto loan would get the best buy at Chemical. For an unsecured loan, he would get the best deal from Marine Midland.
 
 Under the usury ceilings, the most that banks were allowed to charge on three-year auto loans was 13.38 percent, and on four-year auto loans 12.08 percent.
 
 As a result of the new 17 percent rate set by Chemical, the additional cost of interest on a three-year automobile loan would be $383.92 over the life of the loan. The monthly payments would rise to $213.92 from $203.26.
 
 On a four-year loan, the interest cost would rise by $715.31 over the life of the credit, the monthly installments climbing to $173.14 from $158.23.


INTEREST RATES (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); COMMERCIAL BANKING (90%); CONSUMER LENDING (90%); BANKING LAW (89%); PERSONAL FINANCE (89%); AUTOMOBILE FINANCING (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); BANKING & FINANCE REGULATION (78%); FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT (78%); BANKING & FINANCE (78%); RETAILERS (73%); EXECUTIVES (65%); CLOSINGS (64%); 
