3S8G-CF20-000B-Y1MT


The New York Times


Governor Carey's Second Second Term


19801226T000000Z


As an old campaigner, Hugh Carey is at home on a battlefield, fretful back in the garrison. He must recall with pleasure, at this midpoint of his second term, the perils and drama of his outstanding first-term record, one that can stand comparison with that of any governor New York has had. Yet this midpoint is more a time for urgency than reflection, especially now that three of the Governor's closest advisers have resigned in rapid succession. The questions for Mr. Carey now are: ''How will you surmount the hurdles that face New York now? To whom will you turn for help?
 
 From the start, the Governor assembled and directed a team equal to the most difficult problems. He averted the apparently unavoidable default of the Urban Development Corporation. He staved off New York City's imminent bankruptcy. Drawing on courage born of the deepest conviction, he triumphed over the Legislature's demand for capital punishment. He pushed through tax cuts to stimulate employment when government seemed to need all the cash it could collect. By comparison, the next two years may look drab. His need is to charge himself with the sparks of 1975, the more effectively to conquer the troubles of 1981 and 1982.
 
 The state's economy is floundering, particularly in the north country and the decaying industrial cities. Relief from welfare expenses would help local governments, but economic regeneration would help more. And that will require the talented teamwork that brought forth the Municipal Assistance Corporation and the Financial Control Board.
 
 Health problems continue, although the state has stabilized hospitalization reimbursement under the Governor's departing medical adviser, Dr. Kevin Cahill. Releasing mental patients from state hospitals, intended as a first step toward humanizing their treatment, has left many of them wandering icy city streets, dazed and helpless.
 
 Public transit is now in crisis. Chairman Ravitch of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority says it will need $14 billion in ten years to keep running. The Governor will have to take the lead in examining Mr. Ravitch's ideas for raising the money: they cannot be executed without him. To his credit, Mr. Carey has committed the state to help meet transit operating deficits, but the aid rests on a dubious tax that may be struck down momentarily in court. The state's prison system needs expansion. Court reform is incomplete. Someone must lead the Legislature to agreement on how to meet court decisions on the real property tax.
 
 The list goes on. To attack each issue, Mr. Carey will need the best practical and political brains. But now, Dr. Cahill is resigning his official position. Charles Holcomb, the chief spokesman, has left. So has Judge Richard Brown, influential counsel to the Governor. Few of Mr. Carey's important advisers from the private sector are in consistent contact him.
 
 Mr. Carey seems increasingly dependent on a smaller circle. His secretary, Robert Morgado, is exceptionally able and David Garth, his last campaign strategist, is a man of acknowledged talents. But they cannot alone produce the new ideas that the next two years will require. As an old, effective campaigner, the Governor has more than once demonstrated that he can respond with agility to a sudden loud alarm; the bell ringing now is getting louder.


URBAN DEVELOPMENT (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); URBAN TRANSIT SYSTEMS (88%); CITY LIFE (88%); PROPERTY TAX (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (77%); INSOLVENCY & BANKRUPTCY (74%); TAXES & TAXATION (74%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (73%); LITIGATION (73%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (72%); TAX RELIEF (72%); TAX LAW (72%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (72%); HOSPITALS (69%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (67%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (67%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (64%); MENTAL ILLNESS (63%); PRISONS (50%); 
