3S8G-CFD0-000B-Y2T8


The New York Times


NA


19801222T000000Z


AdvertisingPhilip H. Dougherty Tidings Of Industry Gloom
 
 THERE is gloom over the usually optimistic advertising business.  Predictions about the coming year collected last week from agency heads were generally the most pessimistic heard since 1975. ''A tough year'' was the most popular phrase.
 
 Even though most of the heads of the mmajor agencies expect their revenues to rise, they are forecasting that soaring costs will gobble them up.
 
 A typical remark came from Edward H. Meyer, chief of Grey Advertising, who said, ''I feel pretty good about volume, but I'm worried about the effect inflation is having on the cost side.''
 
 ''Profits will be up, but profit margins down,'' forecast Don Johnston, head of the JWT Group, speaking of the industry.  Harry Paster, executive vice president of the American Association of Advertising Agencies, who is privy to the economic doings of many of the members, said, ''What's scary is not necessarily budget cuts, but the cost of doing business is at a rate higher than income.'' This is generally true, he said, but there are exceptions depending on the mix of clients.
 
 Robert E. Jacoby, president of Ted Bates & Company, taking an even longer range view, commented, ''If this inflation goes on for another year or two, many medium-sized agencies, $200 million and below, will go into bankruptcy.''
 
 One concern regarding interest rates was voiced by John E.  O'Toole, chairman of Foote, Cone & Belding: As rates exceed 20 percent, the supermarket chains, unwilling to have their money tied up in inventory, stop buying. Popular brands quickly go out of stock, their manufacturers see no sense in pushing unavailable products, so they cut down on advertising. Where does this leave the agency?
 
 Kenyon & Eckhardt's particular problem will be that one of its clients, the Chrysler Corporation, has cut its ad budget 15 percent.  At the Interpublic Group of Companies, Philip H. Geier Jr., the chief executive, anticipating the squeeze, has shifted a number of projects now done at the corporate level down to its agencies. And the three international systems Interpublic maintains are currently working on becoming more efficient through restructuring. According to Mr. Geier, these moves might have led to industry talk that James K. Agnew, chief executive of McCann-Erickson, is being replaced. But Mr. Geier vehemently denied the talk had any substance.
 
 With the multinational agencies, the difference in economic climates in various parts of the world can mean economic salvation.  But, as Neil R. Austrian, president of Doyle Dane Bernbach, noted: ''England, France and Germany are the three key markets outside the United States. I've never seen a situation where all four are down at the same time.''
 
 The recession does not include Latin American and the Far East, which are booming, according to Edward N. Ney, Young & Rubicam's chairman. But the advertising industries in those parts of the world are too limited to tip the scales favorably.
 
 One cheerful note from Europe, however, is that advertisers there are beginning to be convinced, as their American counterparts already are, that maintaining ad budgets during recessions is important for maintaining market shares.
 
 The public's attitude toward agencies - the agencies whose stock is publicly traded - has ''soured'' as far as investments are concerned, according to Value Line, an investment advisory service.  It points out that as a group, the publicly held agencies in three months have dropped in favor among investors from less than 20th from the top of the list of 91 corporations to about 20th from the bottom.
 
 An interesting facet of agencies in the recent past, Value Line notes, is that media rates on which agency compensation is based have increased faster than agency costs so that agencies could pocket the difference.
 
 ''The worm may be turning,'' says Value Line. ''The rate of admedium price hikes in 1981 looks to be slower than prices generally - and lower than labor costs, in particular.''


MARKETING & ADVERTISING AGENCIES (90%); MARKETING & ADVERTISING (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); EXECUTIVES (89%); BUDGETS (89%); MARKETING & ADVERTISING EXPENDITURE (78%); RECESSION (78%); COMPANY PROFITS (76%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (76%); BUDGET CUTS (72%); INSOLVENCY & BANKRUPTCY (68%); INTEREST RATES (67%); GROCERY STORES & SUPERMARKETS (52%); 
