3S8G-CF30-000B-Y1RS


The New York Times


ECONOMIC SCENE;GOLD STANDARD AS INFLATION CURB


19801226T000000Z


WHAT should be the first actions to be taken by the Reagan administration to deal with what is generally acknowledged to be a serious economic situation - whether or not Mr. Reagan decides formally to call it a national emergency?
 
 Representative David A. Stockman, the Michigan Republican who is now the President-elect's choice to serve as director of the Office of Management and Budget, and Representative Jack Kemp of upstate New York urged Mr. Reagan to declare a national economic emergency in their now-famous ''economic Dunkirk'' paper. That paper stemmed from two memorandums written on Nov. 6, right after the election, by Lewis E. Lehrman, the 42-year-old chairman of the executive committee of the Rite Aid Corporation, a large drugstore chain.
 
 In the shorter of these two memorandums, Mr. Lehrman urged that the new Republican administration avoid repeating the ''tragedy'' Britain had suffered as a result of the monetarist policies of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. Unemployment and inflation had been worsened, he said, because the Conservatives had failed to understand the relations among budget deficits, central bank monetary policy and high marginal tax rates on ''working people's inflationhoisted incomes.''
 
 Mr. Reagan could avoid the Thatcher trap, said Mr. Lehrman, if he moved with speed and conviction to attain these three objectives:
 
 - Achieve a balanced budget much sooner than originally planned (in the 1983 fiscal year, according to the Sept. 9 Reagan budget projections).
 
 - Harmonize the new budgetary policy with Federal Reserve monetary policy in a planned and coherent way - but without compromising the independence of the Fed.
 
 - Move immediately after the inauguration on a tax reform bill that would cut marginal tax rates and capital gains taxes, while abolishing the distinction between taxes on income from savings and from wages and salaries.
 
 In his longer memorandum of Nov. 6, Mr. Lehrman declared that President-elect Reagan's transition had been ''overtaken by a financial crisis and economic events which are moving rapidly beyond control.'' This financial ''tidal wave,'' he said, had been coming on for years and ''is now upon us.'' And he called for a task force of five experts to develop a program of action in the critical areas of budget, tax, monetary and regulatory policy. This task force, he added, should have an adequate supporting staff and direct access to each of the important economic and monetary agencies of the Government as well as to the appropriate Congressional committees.
 
 The Lehrman memorandum noted that ''it might be necessary for the President, by executive order, to declare a national emergency.'' But it stressed that the current emergency would call for actions different from those taken in past emergencies, such as price and wage controls. ''On the contrary,'' said the Lehrman memorandum, ''the new program for economic renewal will deal with the crisis by a systematic reformation of economic institutions. Economic recovery would rely upon market institutions, free prices, mobile factors of production and a stable currency.'' During the first 100 days of his administration, Mr. Reagan would explain the new program ''with several national speeches and fireside chats,'' a la Franklin Delano Roosevelt in 1933.
 
 But how would such a program - designed to avoid a rise in unemployment, as would the programs advocated by such supply-siders as Representatives Stockman and Kemp - assure an early end to inflation? Rejecting price and wage controls, Mr. Lehrman and his colleagues have a major alternative to controls up their sleeves: a return to the gold standard.
 
 As Mr. Lehrman told the Senate Banking Committee last April 15: ''A dollar, convertible into a fixed weight of gold, insured reasonable price stability in our past. If price stability remains the goal, a dollar linked to gold will develop as the alternative to price and wage controls. Moreover, gold and the international gold standard - the impartial, neutral world currency regime - will also develop as a global alternative to the present defective multi-reserve currency system, based as it is on unpredictable national monies, subject to sovereign manipulation.''
 
 He recognized that the prospects of an early return to gold was highly improbable. Price and wage controls, he suggested last May, might be tried first; but they would fail, and, as public perception of that failure spread, a ''political mutation'' would occur that would end inflation by means of a convertible currency, a concomitant reform of the international monetary system, balanced budgets and a renovation of the tax system.
 
 Such is the doctrine championed by Mr. Lehrman and Mr. Reagan's other radically conservative supply-siders. If Mr. Lehrman is named Deputy Secretary or Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs, as his supporters, such as Representatives Stockman and Kemp, hope, this will point the direction in which the Reagan administration's economic policy is moving. But it is not yet there, and there is strong opposition among the more traditional conservatives, such as Arthur F. Burns, a former chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, and the dozen other members of the Committee to Fight Inflation, a bipartisan group of former senior Government economic officials.


TAXES & TAXATION (91%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (90%); BUDGETS (90%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); ECONOMIC POLICY (89%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); BANKING & FINANCE (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (89%); TAX LAW (87%); PUBLIC FINANCE (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (73%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (73%); WAGES & SALARIES (72%); CENTRAL BANKS (72%); BUDGET DEFICITS (71%); BUDGET FORECASTS (71%); INCOME TAX (71%); MONETARY POLICY (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); RETAIL PHARMACEUTICALS (70%); PHARMACIES & DRUG STORES (69%); CAPITAL GAINS TAX (66%); TAX REFORM (66%); 
