3S8G-CK00-000B-Y1V6


The New York Times


MORTGAGE RATE RISE HELPED PUSH PRICES UP 1% FOR OCTOBER


19801126T000000Z


The renewed surge in mortgage rates helped push consumer prices up 1 percent last month, to a point 12.6 percent above that of the previous October, the Government reported today.
 
 The increase matched that of September, and it meant that prices thus far in 1980 have risen at a 12.2 percent annual rate. By comparison, the Consumer Price Index rose 13.3 percent in all of last year . The inc rease for October, were it to continue for 12 months, would come to 12.6 percent with compounding.
 
 The news was about in line with economists' expectations and led to renewed predictions that consumer prices were likely to rise 1 percent or more each month for at least the next six months.
 
 The index for the New York-northeastern New Jersey area rose by a seasonally adjusted rate of seven-tenths of 1 percent in October, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported. This was attributed to a sharp advance in the cost of home ownership and to higher prices for food and apparel. (Page A16.) 'Inflation Outlook Is Poor'
 
 ''The inflation outlook is poor,'' said Lawrence G. Chimerine, chairman of Chase Econometrics, a forecasting concern. ''We're expecting about an 11 percent increase in the C.P.I. next year.'' The last official Carter Administration forecast, issued in July, was for a 9.8 percent increase.
 
 The re port illustrated the difficulties fac ing President-elect Ronald Reagan, who has made an attack on infl ation a central part of his economic policies.
 
 Meanwhile, the Labor Department also disclosed today that purchasing power of Americans fell sharply last month. The decline of six-tenths of 1 percent in what the average pay check can buy followed a two-tenths of 1 percent drop in September. Decline in Purchasing Power
 
 This means that in the past year take-home pay, adjusted to account for inflation, has dropped by 6 percent. Declines in purchasing power like that last month reinforce fears of economists that consumers will be unable to keep increasing their spending, increases that were largely responsible for pulling the economy out of recession.
 
 The big news in the latest consumer price report was the rise in housing costs. Up by only seven-tenths of 1 percent in September, they rose 1.3 percent in October.
 
 The largest part of the change was accounted for by financing costs. After declining sharply in August and slightly in September, financing, taxes and insurance charges rose 3.1 percent in October.
 
 This turnaround reflects a reversal in mortgage rates that occurred in late summer, when rates halted several months of decline and began rising again. Further Impact Expected
 
 However, the Consumer Price Index reflects mortgage rates at the time the loan is actually made rather than when a commitment is given. Accordingly, changes in mortgage rates generally take several months to appear in the index.
 
 Since mortgage rates have continued to rise, this means that the inflation rate is likely to be pushed up for at least the next two months by increases in rates that have already happened. Moreover, the index is thought to overstate the size of these changes because it calculates the change in financing costs as if every mortgage loan were rewritten each month at the new rate.
 
 The index has also been criticized as assuming that consumers all buy new houses each month. But Labor Department officials respond that home purchases, which represents only 11 percent of the index, are weighted, like car purchases, so that they represent the average purchasing pattern of the public.
 
 The rise in housing costs last month, also the result of a 1.5 percent increase in house prices, continued a pattern of larger-thanaverage increases.
 
 The good news in consumer costs was that food prices rose by a comparatively modest eight-tenths of 1 percent, after being up 1.6 percent in September. Meat, poultry, fish and eggs increased by 1.4 percent, as against 3.5 percent a month earlier, and fruits and vegatable prices fell by 1.1 percent, compared to a 3.8 percent increase in September.
 
 In addition, most energy prices declined, including fuel oil, coal, bottled gas and electricity. Gasoline prices, which had fallen for several months, rose by a modest three-tenths of 1 percent.
 
 However with both food and energy, the outlook is less sanguine.  Food prices have been rising at the farm level, and Howard Hjort, chief economist at the Department of Agriculture, said today that ''world feedgrain supplies will be depleted when the time comes to harvest the 1981 crops,'' meaning little margin against another bad harvest. Oil Costs on Rise Again
 
 As for energy, world oil prices have begun to rise again, as a result of the war between Iraq and Iran. The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Coun tries is scheduled to meet in Bali on Dec. 15and is likely to approve a sharp rise in official prices, if open market prices remain at their current high levels.
 
 Elsewhere, consumer price increases moderated. Apparel and upkeep rose five-tenths of 1 percent, compared to 1.3 percent in the preceding month. Transportation rose eight-tenths of 1 percent, compared to 1.3 percent, although that included a decline of 1.5 percent in new-car prices. Some economists questioned that decline, maintaining it was based on ''quality adjustments'' made by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, rather than any drop in new car prices.
 
 Finally, medical care rose eight-tenths of 1 percent, the same as in September and entertainment was up five-tenths of 1 percent, compared to 1 percent a month earlier.


UNITED STATES ECONOMY; PRICES; RETAIL STORES AND TRADE; HOUSING  PRICE INCREASES (95%); MORTGAGE RATES (91%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); INTEREST RATES (90%); PRICE CHANGES (90%); INFLATION (90%); MORTGAGE LOANS (90%); CONSUMER PRICE INDEX (90%); LABOR SECTOR PERFORMANCE (78%); STATISTICS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); RECESSION (77%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (76%); WAGES & SALARIES (73%); RETAILERS (73%); FOOD PRICES (73%); ECONOMIC POLICY (72%); US PRESIDENTS (64%); 
