3S8G-CH10-000B-Y1W2


The New York Times


PRIME SURGES TO 20%; DOW TUMBLES 17.83


19801211T000000Z


A record-tying prime rate - and fears of further interest rate increases - sent stock prices tumbling yesterday. The Dow Jones industrial average plunged 17.83 points, to 916.21.
 
 Bond prices continued to fall sharply, creating record yields in many fixed-income securities.  Major banks raised their basic lending charge for blue-ribbon clients by a full percentage point, to 20 percent. This marked the seventh increase since the beginning of November, when the prime stood at 14 1/2 percent. It was 20 percent in April.
 
 David Jones, a money market economist for Aubrey G. Lanston & Company, dealers in Government securities, said he expected the prime rate to reach 22 percent within the next several weeks. 'Upward Momentum' Cited
 
 ''That could be the peak,'' Mr. Jones said. ''But, over the near term, there is significant upward momentum in rates reflecting the pressure applied by the Federal Reserve.''
 
 Gathering storm clouds for the stock market also included trepidation that rising rates could restrain economic growth in 1981 and posssibly lead to a renewal of last spring's recession.
 
 The Dow industrials, along with other popular market indicators, have been battered steadily in recent sessions. On Monday, the Dow dropped 22 1/2 points in response to rising interest rates and mounting investor fears of a possible Soviet invasion of Poland.
 
 Just three weeks ago, on Nov. 20, the Dow finished above the 1,000 mark for the first time in almost four years. Analysts attributed that performance to hopes that President-elect Ronald Reagan would take forceful steps to restrain inflation and revive the economy. Earlier Drops Recalled
 
 Yesterday, however, Wall Street professionals studied the continuing surge in interest rates and recalled nervously that rising rates had set the stage for sharp drops in stock prices starting in October 1978 and again in October 1979.
 
 Trading volume fell to 49.9 million shares from Tuesday's 53.2 million.  Amid yesterday's growing tensions, some investors rushed to sell and preserve profits. Others were induced to sell because brokeragefirm charges for margin accounts, or buying stocks on credit, swelled to highs of 22 percent and more.
 
 Finally, the fail ure of the market to provi de new leadership in terms of advancing stock groups was seen by s ome analysts as a basic sign of weakness. Some of the old favorites - oils and precious-metalissues - were pounded by selling, and this, i n turn, intensified the uneasy atmosphere on Wall Street. Superior Oil Down 13 1/4
 
 Superior Oil, the leading independent producer of oil and gas, dropped 13 1/4 points, to 198 1/4. Several weeks ago, it traded at a record price of 251.
 
 In the process, Superior has lost its ranking as the highest-price issue on the New York Stock Exchange. This position now is held by Teledyne, the conglomerate. Yesterday, Teledyne retreated 6 7/8 points, to 210 5/8.
 
 Among precious-metal stocks, Dome Mines and Homestake Mining fell more than 6 points each.  Issues in this group turned weak on Tuesday after the price of gold bullion sank below $600 an ounce for the first time since June.  Analysts said that some traders were selling gold to buy highyielding fixed-income securities.
 
 Yesterday, the price of bullion continued to drop in foreign markets. Computer, Defense Issues Off
 
 Computer and defense issues, along with technology stocks, also gave ground yesterday as erstwhile market favorites turned weak.
 
 Part of the stock market's lingering nervousne ss reflected a forecast earl ier this week by Henry Kaufman, chief economist for Salomon Broth ers, of further increases in interest rates before a peak is reach ed. ''It's very difficult to say how high is high,'' he observed Tues day. Mr. Kaufman also predicted that assets of money market funds would climb from an estimated $85 billion at year-end toaround $135 b illion by the close of 1981.
 
 The Big Board managed to produce one outstanding gainer, the United Refining Company. Its stock jumped 18 points, to 45, in response to an agreement in principle whereby Coral Petroleum, a privately owned concern, would acquire United for $50 a share in cash. Based in Warren, Pa., United is a regional refiner and marketer of gasoline and other petroleum products.


ECONOMIC NEWS (92%); INTEREST RATES (92%); PRIME RATES (90%); STOCK INDEXES (90%); BONDS (90%); STOCK EXCHANGES (89%); MANUFACTURING OUTPUT (78%); BANKING & FINANCE (78%); RECESSION (78%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (78%); BOND MARKETS (77%); GOVERNMENT BONDS (77%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (75%); EMERGING MARKETS (72%); COMMERCIAL BANKING (72%); 
