3S8G-CJW0-000B-Y1CR


The New York Times


Economic Scene;Ending Inflation Expectations


19801128T000000Z


WHAT lessons can be learned from the way the hyperinflations in Germany, Poland, Austria and Hungary were suddenly ended in 1923 and 1924 after each country's price index had reached incredibly high levels?
 
 While those inflations and the way they were stopped differed in details, they had, as Thomas J. Sargent of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis observes, these important common features:
 
 - Reckless fiscal policy was at the root of them all, with each country persistently running enormous budget deficits.
 
 - Deliberate and drastic fiscal and monetary policies were adopted when it became clear that the inflation was running amok.
 
 - Once those drastic measures were announced and accepted as credible by the public, prices and foreign-exchange values of currencies stabilized at once.
 
 - This stabilization occurred even though the ''high powered'' money supply - the circulating notes issued by the countries' central banks - went on growing rapidly for months or years longer.
 
 The most important lesson to be drawn from this experience, Mr.  Sargent concludes, is that government needs to end public expectations that it will go on creating inflation indefinitely. If employers and workers, lenders and borrowers and all others expect inflation to continue, they will strike inflationary bargains on the basis of those expectations. But the inflation ''only seems to have a momentum of its own, while it is actually the long-term government policy of running large deficits on average which imparts the momentum,'' according to Mr. Sargent.
 
 To stop that momentum, it would be necessary today to risk whatever pain, in terms of lost output, lost jobs or changes in the structure of government benefits to particular groups, that a drastic change in fiscal and budget policy entailed. Mr. Sargent concedes that economists do not possess reliable models for predicting what disruptions, in lost output and employment, a drastic change in the fiscal policy regime would cause, although he is hopeful on the basis of the earlier European experience in stopping hyperinflation.
 
 But the drastic policy actions in Central Europe occurred after hyperinflation had destroyed all hopes that the existing system was viable. How long it would take, and with what pain in lost output it would take to day would depend, he suggests, on how resolute and evident the g overnment's commitment was.
 
 President-elect Ronald Reagan's economic advisers are now talking about an all-out, immediate, comprehensive attack on both inflation and economic stagnation. That comprehensive p olicy is to include big tax cuts, defense spending increases, major r eductions in other Federal expenditures and a restrictive moneta ry policy. But the Reagan advisers are divided on which elements in that ''comprehensive'' policy deserve the highest priority.
 
 Some would scale down tax cuts, while others would not. Some would slash social spending, but Representative Jack F. Kemp, the leader of the populists behind Mr. Reagan, has warned his party against ''trying to repeal the New Deal'' and urges ''an expanding economy as a way of fighting inflation.'' Mr. Reagan has refused to drop his support of Representative Kemp's and Senator William V. Roth's bill to cut personal income taxes by 30 percent in three years; this week Mr. Reagan's counselor, Edwin Meese 3d, said that income tax cuts ''along the lines'' of Kemp-Roth would be the ''first priority'' within a comprehensive economic program after the Reagan administration takes office on Jan. 20.
 
 Yet, in a time of big budget deficits, it will be obviously tough to reconcile big tax cuts and defense spending rises with the sort of anti-inflationary fiscal policy regime counseled by Mr. Sargent and his fellow rational-expectationists. Even if Mr. Kemp's warnings about avoiding ''ideological battles with labor and blacks'' are put aside, the Reagan administration is likely to find it impossible to make social spending cuts big enough to close the budget gap.
 
 Henry Kaufman of Salomon Brothers notes that uncontrollable expenditures, including Social Security, public employee retirement, unemployment compensation, medical assistance and interest on the public debt, but not including defense expenditures, accounted for 67.3 percent of total outlays in the 1980 fiscal year. Defense expenditures accounted for another 23.5 percent, thereby bringing uncontrollables and defense up to 91 percent of total budget outlays. The Treasury is going to have to borrow about $75 billion in the 1981 fiscal year, Mr. Kaufman estimates, assuming only $10 billion in tax cuts. ''It is far too early,'' he says, ''to conclude whether we as a people have the stamina or foresight to accept a rigorous setting of priorities in the Federal budget. If we do not, budgetary credibility will not be achieved.''
 
 With more big deficits in sight, rational expectations of inflation are likely to continue. And a heavy burden upon monetary policy for trying to curb inflation is likely to remain. The consequence will be a chronically high level of interest rates, which will slow down investment, consumption and economic growth.
 
 Sluggish growth or even resumed recession in the coming year may act as one more episode in temporarily reducing the rate of inflation. But a drastic and abrupt end to inflation, such as happened in Central Europe after World War I, is not yet in the cards. That's what the banks seemed to be saying this week as they put up their prime rates of interest to 17 3/4 and 18 percent.


UNITED STATES ECONOMY; UNITED STATES POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; ECONOMIC PLANNING  ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); ECONOMIC POLICY (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); PUBLIC FINANCE (90%); BUDGETS (89%); ECONOMIC DECLINE (77%); MONEY SUPPLY (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); BANKING & FINANCE REGULATION (76%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (76%); BUDGET DEFICITS (76%); CENTRAL BANKS (76%); MONETARY POLICY (76%); CURRENCIES (74%); DEFENSE SPENDING (71%); LAYOFFS (69%); US PRESIDENTS (60%); POLITICS (60%); 
