3S8G-CF10-000B-Y1JG


The New York Times


INSURERS SEEK HIGHER INTEREST RATES AS BORROWING ON POLICIES INCREASES


19801226T000000Z


With interest rates at record peaks, some of the nation's major life insurance companies are being drained of large amounts of cash because of loans to policyholders.
 
 This has prompted industry executives and state regulators throughout the country to recommend a significant change in insurance laws. The industry has been lobbying hard in recent months to abolish state-set interest ceilings on policy loans. It wants a variable-rate provision for all new policy loans.
 
 The cash drain is but the most recent indication of the turmoil and change sweeping through the huge industry as it struggles to adjust to an era of high inflation and lofty interest rates.
 
 By the force of necessity, traditional practices in the life insurance business are being scrutinized and often cast aside. The old ways of this hidebound industry are being replaced by innovative approaches - in policies offered, in investment and in marketing.
 
 The main reason for the cash depletion is that policyholders have spotted a bargain and are taking advantage of it. Most permanent policies - commonly called ''whole life'' insurance - offer holders the right to borrow against the cash value of their policies at an interest rate of 5 to 8 percent, depending on the state-mandated ceiling.
 
 Now, with the yields available on such popular investments as six-month money market certificates at more than 15 percent, policyholders are borrowing at bargain rates from the insurance companies and reinvesting the funds elsewhere.
 
 ''We're seeing the policy loan figures start to respond to these super-high interest rates,'' said J. Robert Ferrari, vice president and chief economist of the Prudential Insurance Company of America, the nation's largest life insurer. According to Mr. Ferrari, the amount of new policy loans taken out each day by Prudential policyholders has increased by roughly 20 percent since late November.
 
 The policy loan situation is much the same throughout the industry, based on a spot check with other large life insurers. The problem, to some extent, is a rerun of the travail suffered by the industry last spring, when interest rates reached similar heights.
 
 The cash drain became so bad then that some companies were forced to issue commercial paper, short-term debt instruments, to raise the money needed to meet their obligations, while others sold bonds and stocks, often at substantial losses.
 
 ''Nobody went insolvent, but there were companies that took big losses,'' said Maureen McGrath, senior counsel of the American Council of Life Insurance, a Washington-based trade group. ''But they had no choice. They had to make good, they had to come up with the money.''
 
 Last April, for instance, the 15 large companies regularly surveyed by the American Council of Life Insurance reported that new policy loans topped $1 billion that month. By contrast, the total for the 1979 month was $401 million, which at the time was a record. Already Out the Door
 
 Few insurance executives expect that the cash drain will be as bad this time. But the reason for their relative optimism is not that things are genuinely better today, but that so much of their funds are already out the door.
 
 ''When you take that money out, you can't do it again,'' explained Donald J. Schuenke, president of the Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Company, a large life insurer based in Milwaukee.
 
 Even the state regulators agree that the life insurance industry needs relief. Earlier this month, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners approved a ''model bill'' that includes the variable loan rate provision favored by the industry. The maximum rate would be pegged to the most recent month's average yield on a Moody's Investors Service index of corporate bond rates. Using the November figures, the current rate would be 13.63 percent.
 
 The bill will be introduced in many states early next year. ''I think the legislation will be approved in a substantial number of states,'' said Miss McGrath of the industry group, who is leading the industry's drive.
 
 Altering the state laws will undoubtedly help the industry in the long run. ''But it isn't going to do us much good for a while,'' said J. Edwin Matz, chairman of the John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company. ''Loan rates on the old policies are frozen.'' Advance Commitments Reduced
 
 The industry is trying to ease the cash squeeze partly by changing its investment practices. For example, big life insurers have traditionally committed investment funds in advance by as much as three years for specific real estate and other commercial projects.  This aggravated the industry's problem during the spring, insurance executives concede, since so much of their funds were already committed at a time when policyholders were demanding record amounts of loan money.
 
 At John Hancock, for instance, the total of funds ''advance committed'' was more than $1 billion at the start of 1980. But now, the comparable figure is less than half that much, said Mr. Matz.  ''And the whole industry is not nearly as advance committed as it was,'' he observed.
 
 Another problem for some companies has been a loss of funds from pension funds. As money managers, insurance concerns are known as bond market specialists. And with bond prices collapsing, as interest rates have climbed, some corporate pension fund managers have turned away from insurance companies. Instead, many are handling their investments in-house, often participating directly in the short-term money markets.
 
 However, insurance companies generally assert that they have not lost pension fund money overall, mostly because they are changing their investment practices, becoming more flexible and looking at different approaches. Money Fund for Pension Clients
 
 For instance, the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company offers its pension clients a separate short-term money market account - in effect, a money fund managed by the life insurance company. ''That's been popular lately,'' said Frank J. Rudavsky, vice president of group pensions for Metropolitan.
 
 At Northwestern Mutual, Mr. Schuenke is leading his company into several energy-related investments, from coal rights in Wyoming to solar projects in Maryland.
 
 Throughout the industry, there seems to be a newly aggressive investment philosophy. ''Insurance companies were always buy-andhold investors, but that's a thing of the past,'' Mr. Schuenke said.
 
 Moreover, with more than $400 billion in assets under management, the changing practices of the life insurance industry will have a lasting effect on the capital markets, according to Dan M. McGill, chairman of the life insurance department at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School.
 
 As an investor, Mr. McGill said, the industry will demand more flexible, short-term credit instruments and commercial mortgages.  ''The insurance companies are no longer going to be the sources of stable, long-term funds that they once were,'' he added. Criticism Is Magnified
 
 In recent years, ''whole life'' policies have come under increasing attack as a low-yielding investment in inflationary times. The present combination of high inflation with high interest rates has only served to magnify that criticism. In response, the old-line companies in the industry are trying to come up with new products.
 
 For example, John Hancock is now in the process of getting approval to sell a ''variable rate of return'' policy. Under such a policy, the company invests the policyholder's money in a stock or bond fund and the gains are passed back through to him as a shareholder.
 
 However, some analysts argue that a handful of ''aggressive upstarts'' in the industry are the ones really showing the way to the future for the business. Such relative unknowns as National Liberty, Occidental Life, Transport Life and Beneficial National Life, they contend, are the genuine innovators of the industry, marketing mostly cut-rate term insurance on television and with advertising inserts in bank credit-card mailings.
 
 ''These smaller companies are the cutting edge of the industry,'' said Robert W. Back, an analyst for the Harris Trust and Savings Bank in Chicago. ''The establishment life insurance companies are very conservative. They've always fought innovation and, for the most part, they're still resisting. That attitude is hurting them now and will continue to hurt them in the future.''


INSURANCE (94%); INTEREST RATES (93%); ECONOMIC NEWS (93%); LIFE INSURANCE (90%); INSURANCE POLICIES (90%); EXECUTIVES (89%); INSURANCE ASSOCIATIONS (89%); WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE (78%); COMMERCIAL PAPER (78%); CORPORATE DEBT (78%); INSURANCE REGULATION & POLICY (78%); BONDS (78%); INSURANCE LAW (73%); MONEY MARKET ACCOUNTS (73%); SECURITIES TRADING (70%); INSOLVENCY & BANKRUPTCY (60%); 
