3S8G-CFV0-000B-Y3SR


The New York Times


CONSUMER SATURDAY;PITFALLS OF BUYING ON CREDIT


19801220T000000Z


'T IS the season to incur debt, and when the gift bills come due after New Year's many consumers will suffer a credit hangover of epic proportions, some experts fear. Last year, recalled Luther Gatling, director of the Community Service Society's credit counseling office, ''It was like someone pulled a curtain and shouted 'Stage front!' and everyone rushed forward with debt problems.''
 
 For one thing, borrowers will begin to feel the bite of sharply higher interest rates permitted New York State banks under a deregulation measure that lifts longtime usury ceilings. Although credit card balances and other revolving credit lines like overdraft checking will continue to be charged at existing interest rates until at least late January, the tariff is expected then to rise substantially - Citibank has already announced a 19.8 percent rate plus a new $15 a year fee for Visa and MasterCard. Chase Manhattan will also impose the fee for its Visa card but will keep its rate down to 18 percent. Installment loan rates, meanwhile, have already risen from a previous range of 11 to 13 percent annually to 17 to 19 percent and climbing.
 
 Concurrently, consumers will be hit with higher fuel prices, higher Social Security deductions and more inflation.  How do you know if you're sinking into debt over your head?  According to the Consumer Credit Counseling Service, a businesssponsored, nonprofit debt-counseling and bill-collection service, ideally no more than 10 percent of the monthly take-home pay should go for credit or loan repayment (exclusive of mortgage).  Fifteen percent can prove troublesome and 20 percent ''is the absolute red line.'' Check the month's charges to date before a new shopping trip, it was suggested.
 
 Of the 5,000 families that come in to the service annually for help, nearly half end up forced to declare bankruptcy because they came in too late. Counseling is free; assistance in a debtmanagement/bill-repayment program costs $2.50 a week except in hardship cases. Appointments are necessary and can be arranged by calling 594-1200. Another counseling group operated by the Community Service Society of New York offers free consultations by appointment at 677-3066.
 
 'T IS the season for high spirits, but some of the spirits may be higher than advertised or not available, according to the New York City Consumer Affairs Department. Since a longtime law establishing minimum wine prices was ruled illegal by the State Court of Appeals last September, uncorking widespread price wars, some merchants have joined to place omnibus ads listing their offerings.
 
 However, department inspectors found that not all stores listed in the ads actually stocked all wines at the listed prices. One ad headed ''Foremost Liquors,'' including 10 stores, listed dozens of bottles and prices and at the bottom the notice: ''Prices may vary'' -which the Consumer Affairs department called a possible violation of the regulation requiring stores to sell at advertised prices.
 
 The inquiry followed the complaint of a consumer attracted by a listing for Beautour California cabernet sauvignon at $3.34 a bottle in one of the group ads called ''Price Cutters.'' But when she went to one of the stores listed in the ad, Crossroads at 55 West 14th Street, a merchant told her he didn't carry it. A closer reading of the ad disclosed, in a block of type listing spirits from Denmark, this disclaimer: ''Not all items available at all stores.'' But when later Price Cutters ads failed to carry the disclaimer and advertised wines were found unavailable, notices of violation were issued.  Subsequently, the department said, compliance improved.
 
 Consumers can avoid disappointment, suggested Karen Borack, the department spokesman, by calling first to check availability and price.
 
 'T IS the season for many happy returns - and some not-so-happy returns if a store's policy limits refunds or exchanges on gift items. A state law requires only that a store abide by its conspicuously posted refund policy. If no such policy is stated, a consumer has the right to return goods for a refund within 20 days.
 
 Crucial to all such transactions is a dated store receipt, if possible, or, if the item was a gift, the store ticket. Assuming the items are undamaged, the major department stores are often flexible this time of year. Generally New York department stores offer cash refunds for cash purchases, credits or mailed checks for credit-card purchases and exchanges in most cases. Time limits vary: within a week (Alexander's, Bloomingdale's, May's) after purchase or somewhat longer (Macy's, Gimbels, Saks,); or ''earliest convenience'' after Christmas (B. Altman). There are some little differences. May's will not accept returned toys for cash, only credit, and Saks will refund only the new sale price if a returned item has been marked down after Christmas. However, if something is returned because of a defect, the limits are usually extended by store and product warranties.  Ralph Blumental


CREDIT CARDS (90%); INTEREST RATES (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); CONSUMER CREDIT COUNSELING (90%); BEVERAGE PRICES (89%); DEREGULATION (89%); CONSUMER LAW (78%); INSOLVENCY & BANKRUPTCY (78%); CONSUMER LENDING (78%); RETAILERS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); CONSUMER PROTECTION (78%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (77%); MORTGAGE RATES (75%); PRICE CHANGES (74%); INSPECTIONS (70%); PRICE CUTTING (69%); ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (64%); FAMILY (62%); SOCIAL SECURITY (51%); APPEALS COURTS (50%); 
