3S8G-CDW0-000B-Y16B


The New York Times


THE DIME OF N.Y. ACTIVE AS LENDER TO HOME BUYERS


19801228T000000Z


Residential mortgage rates are high. The savings-bank industry is losing money. But the Dime Savings Bank of New York is still plunging ahead these days, offering numbers of residential mortgages and cooperative apartment loans at a time when other banks have been pulling in their horns.
 
 The Dime - second largest savings bank in New York State with deposits of $4.5 billion and total assets of over $5 billion - has been issuing loans to buyers of homes and co-ops this year at a pace that observers believe to be faster than that of any other thrift institution in the area. While exact comparisons are hard to come by, it seems clear that, by keeping its mortgage window open, the Dime is making its presence felt while some savings banks, commercial banks and savings and loan associations are waiting out this unprecedented high-interest rate period.
 
 ''Historically the Dime has been a residential lender,'' said Sigfred L. Solem, senior executive vice president and mortgage officer of the Brooklyn-based bank. ''And we've been wide open all year.''
 
 What accounts for the Dime's unusually high level of mortgage activity during this year? The answer seems to be that the bank - quite large in relation to other savings banks but rather small in relation to the major money-center commercial banks in the New York financial capital - started a program at the beginning of the year enabling it to obtain mortgage funds from the so-called ''secondary'' market in addition to the traditional source of funds from deposits.
 
 The Dime program involves the issuance, through the investment banking firm of Salomon Brothers, of ''mortgage pass-through certificates'' representing pools, or specific groups, of mortgage loans made by the bank. In effect, the Dime was thus able to resell some of its mortgages to institutional investors in the secondary market, while retaining a small portion of the interest rate charged as its ''spread'' for continuing to handle the mortgage bookeeping details.
 
 ''We began this program in January, when the Federal Government pre-empted the state usury ceiling, enabling us to write mortgages at rates that could be sold in the secondary market,'' said Mr. Solem.  ''We've just completed our second sale of certificates, which have generated $20 million this year without relying on deposits.''
 
 Prior to Jan. 1, 1980, commercial banks in New York with a national charter were able legally to charge higher interest rates than statechartered savings banks. After Jan. 1, 1981, savings banks will be permitted to do other types of lending now prohibited by New York State legislation.
 
 The statistics at the Dime, which has 24 branches in Metropolitan New York and the Albany region, back up Mr. Solem's statements on its mortgage activity. Between Jan. 1 and Nov. 30, 1980, the institution issued 1,800 mortgages, principally for residences, totaling $112 million. According to Mr. Solem, this amounted to about half of the volume in the corresponding period of last year, but the level nevertheless was far above that of most other banks in New York.
 
 The bank's loans to owners of co-ops show even greater strength.  During the first eleven months of 1980, it made 536 loans totaling $16.7 million. In the year-ago period, the Dime made 255 co-op loans adding up to $6.2 million.
 
 ''The name of the game is giving the best service possible,'' said William O. Keim, assistant vice president of the Dime. ''For example, we will go anywhere in the city to close.''
 
 The Dime's record over the last year is all the more meaningful in view of the roller-coaster pattern of the money market. The prime interest rate that commercial banks charge their largest and most credit-worthy corporate customers reached a record 21 1/2 perpercent and now ranges around 21 percent.
 
 In the case of savings banks, rates paid on six-month and longerterm certificates rose significantly. The National Association of Mutual Savings Banks, a national trade association, said that its members - saddled with a surfeit of long-term, low-interest mortgage loans on their books - therefore had an overall deficit in 1980 and expect an even worse fate next year.
 
 At the largest savings bank in New York State, the Bowery Savings Bank, Rudolph A. Marini, senior vice president and mortgage officer, said: ''We've been in the mortgage market but we're not heavy. It's a function of rates rather than desire.''
 
 As far as commercial banks are concerned, the leader in New York mortgages is generally conceded to be Citibank. ''We have been fairly active and we have made public announcements about being in the mortgage market,'' observed Robert A. Clark, a vice president. ''But we have got a bigger share of a smaller pie.''
 
 At the Dime, conventional fixed-rate mortgages for one and twofamily owner-occupied dwellings have been offered during the year at interest rates ranging from a low of 12 percent to a high of 17 1/2 percent, with one-time origination fees going from 1 1/2 percentage points to three percentage points. At present, the rate for such mortgages - where the bank has about 90 percent of its $2.8 billion portfolio - is 15 1/4 percent with a three point fee.
 
 In the arena of cooperative loans, the range throughout the year has been from 13 percent to 16 1/2 percent with origination fees varying from 1 1/2 percentage points to 3 1/2 percentage points.
 
 The bank also has developed newer types of mortgages. For example, in June it announced a flexible rollover mortgage renegotiable every five years, with the interest rate readjusted in line with the prevailing rates at the time. The Dime also became the first bank in New York to offer variable rate mortgages in September.
 
 The strength in the Dime's mortgage lending activities came in a year that Harry W. Albright Jr., a former New York State Superintendent of Banks, became its chief executive officer. Mr.  Albright, who served as banking superintendent under Gov. Nelson A.  Rockefeller, joined the Dime as president in 1975 and became chief operating officer four years later.
 
 For next year, the forecast is for a still-higher degree of participation in the residential mortgage and co-op loan market within the state.
 
 ''It's getting stronger all the time,'' noted Mr. Kiem. And Mr.  Solem added, ''I don't see any letup for 1981.''


SAVINGS & LOANS (91%); MORTGAGE LOANS (91%); RESIDENTIAL COOPERATIVES (90%); REAL ESTATE (90%); MORTGAGE RATES (90%); INTEREST RATES (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); HOUSING MARKET (90%); COMMERCIAL BANKING (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); MORTGAGE BANKING & FINANCE (90%); SECONDARY MARKET FINANCING (89%); SECONDARY MORTGAGE MARKET (89%); MULTIFAMILY MORTGAGES (78%); MORTGAGE BACKED SECURITIES (78%); MONEY CENTER BANKS (78%); INVESTMENT BANKING (78%); MORTGAGE INVESTMENTS (78%); EXECUTIVES (72%); 
