3S8G-CGC0-000B-Y07R


The New York Times


HIGH INTEREST RATES THREATEN COMPANIES' SOLVENCY


19801215T000000Z


The extraordinary rise in interest rates over the last month has threatened the solvency of many companies and increased the possibility of a recession in 1981, according to some business leaders and economists. The high rates also have created turmoil throughout the financial and commodity markets.
 
 Banks' prime lending rates are at 20 percent, up from 14 1/2 perce nt at the beginning of November. The pri me rate reached 20 percent for the first time last April, and a short recessi on did follow.
 
 Bankers and economists say they are uncertain whether the rates will rise further, or whether the Federal Reserve System will ease its stringent monetary policy.
 
 ''I very truly believe we're in the death throes of this present interest-rate convulsion,'' said Alfred Brittain 3d, chairman of the Bankers Trust Company. Mr. Brittain said he believed the present level of interest rates was ''unsustainable'' and that if it continued it ''would have a very serious impact on the entire economy.''
 
 Some analysts perceived signs last Friday that the central bank might have begun to back down somewhat, but no one professed to be certain.
 
 The big question is the extent to which the high interest rates will permanently damage individual companies.  ''For many people in business, the goal of prosperity has given way to tenuous economic survival,'' said Willard C. Butcher, president of the Chase Manhattan Bank, in an interview yesterday.
 
 A number of large as well as small companies have alreadyy been affected. Prospects for the survival of the Chrysler Corporation, for which the Government authorized $1.5 billion in loan guarantees last year, have worsened as a result of high interest rates. Lee A.  Iacocca, Chrysler's chairman, has described current monetary policy as ''madness.''
 
 ''These rates are putting us out of business,'' said Russell M.  Rockwell, owner of a small distributor of agricultural and industrial equipment in Hamilton, Ohio.
 
 A major problem created by high interest rates is that individuals appear to be cutting back on spending, either because the cost of borrowing has become too expensive or because credit is not available to them. As interest rates soared during November, sales of cars made in the United States plunged to an annual rate of 5.7 million units in the last 10 days of the month from 7.1 million units during the first 20 days.
 
 This reluctance, or inability, of consumers to borrow and spend, has reduced the cash available to companies, most of which borrow to purchase the goods they intend to resell. If business is bad, the companies lose their ability to repay their loans. And, as interest rates climb, the cost of financing these outstanding loans rises.
 
 For a company that borrows at the prime rate of 20 percent, the monthly cost of interest on a $1 million loan has risen to $16,600 from $10,000 at the beginning of November, when the prime was 14 1/2 percent. But only the biggest and most creditworthy corporations can borrow at the prime rate. Most other companies have to pay rates scaled upward from that base.
 
 The effects on corporations of high interest rates, plus the actual cost of credit to investors, is having a profound impact on many markets.
 
 ''The rapidity of the climb in interest rates is having a shock effect that the markets can't ignore,'' said ,Cengiz Israfil, a vice president of the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company.
 
 Stock prices, for example, have been plunging. In the first four days of last week, the Dow Jones industrial average, which monitors the performance of 30 top-quality stocks, fell almost 48 points. It recovered somewhat on Friday, but only in response to signs that short-term interest rates might have reached their peaks.
 
 Not only have investors been worried about what high interest rates might do to corporations but also they have been attracted to the high rates they can get in the short-term financial markets. At one point last week, for example, the yield on three-month Treasury bills rose above 17 percent. That is stiff competition for the stock market, especially when the outlook for corporate profits seems weak.
 
 The stock market is also hurt by the fact that high interest rates discourage investors from buying stock on credit. According to the Federal Reserve's latest statistics, at the end of August, investors had borrowed $12 billion to purchase stocks. At that time, the cost of such borrowing was about 12 1/2 percent; last week it soared above 22 percent.
 
 The long-term bond markets have also been hurt. Prices of long-term bonds dropped sharply during the week and, for the first time, the yield on long-term Treasury bonds rose above the 13 percent level.
 
 Part of the reluctance of investors to place their money in longterm bonds has been their fear that the Federal Reserve's attempt to throttle inflation will not work and that bond prices will decline in the future. But the lure of a 17 percent yield on a three-month Treasury bill also makes it difficult to place money in a much loweryielding Government bond.
 
 Prices of many commodities have also tumbled as interest rates have risen. Over the last month or so, the price of sugar futures, for e xample, has dropped to 27 cents from 45 cents a pound.
 
 The reasons are similar. Investors have been seeking the high yields available to them on such short-term, risk-free investments as Treasury bills. And the cost of credit to purchase commodities has become very heavy.
 
 In the commodity markets, however, declining prices tend to be reinforcing. Because investors often place only a small down payment when they buy a contract in a particular commodity, their entire investment can be quickly wiped out as a result of small movements in price.
 
 For example, when gold was trading at $600 an ounce earlier this month, investors had to put up about $3,000, or 5 percent, for a 100-ounce contract. With the price of gold at $600 an ounce, the value of that contract was $60,000.
 
 But when the price of gold dropped to $560, the value of the contract declined to $56,000, and the investor had to send his broker an additional $4,000. If the investor could not get the money or if he were unwilling to borrow it at the current high cost of credit or if he preferred to invest that $4,000 in Treasury bills, he would have to sell his gold.
 
 This, in turn, would have placed additional downward pressure on the price and would have created a snowballing effect. It is this type of situation that has been depressing the prices of many commodities.
 
 The housing sector also has been seriously damaged by high interest rates. Many potential home buyers cannot afford the current level of mortgage rates - up to 17 percent.


ECONOMIC NEWS (94%); INTEREST RATES (94%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); RECESSION (90%); CENTRAL BANKS (90%); ECONOMIC POLICY (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); MONETARY POLICY (89%); PRIME RATES (89%); BUSINESS CLOSINGS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); INTERVIEWS (73%); COMMODITIES TRADING (72%); COMMODITIES MARKETS (72%); AUTOMOTIVE SALES (69%); 
