3S8G-CFX0-000B-Y41V


The New York Times


I.M.F. SETS SUBSIDY ON LOAN RATE


19801219T000000Z


The International Monetary Fund's executive board has decided to set up a subsidy account to cushion some of the costs of high interest rates to poor countries that borrow from the international agency.
 
 The account will cut up to three percentage points from the interest rate that poor countries have to pay when they borrow from the fund's Supplementary Financing Facility.
 
 The interest charged, based on market rates, is currently 11 1/2 percent. Sixty-nine countries, a fund spokesman said, will be eligible for the full three-percentage-point reduction, while 14 members with somewhat higher per capita income will be eligible for a reduction of one and three-quarter points. The fund has 141 member countries.
 
 The action, which was taken late yesterday, is in response to both the growing concern over the interest rate burden on countries least able to bear it and the dismal balance-of-payments outlook that is projected for most of the emerging countries of the third world.
 
 The Supplementary Financing Facility, representing a $10 billion pool contributed by industrialized countries and oil producers, is used to help developing countries that have been hit by sharply higher oil prices.
 
 The money has been lent so far to 19 countries for terms of four to seven years.  The target for the interest subsidy account is $1.25 billion, which, a fund spokesman said, would come both from other resources of the fund and expected donations from industrialized countries and oil producers.
 
 It was unclear what, if anything, the United States would contribute. ''Some countries have already indicated a willingness to contribute,'' said an official, declining to be more specific.


INTEREST RATES (93%); ECONOMIC NEWS (93%); DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (90%); BALANCE OF PAYMENTS (78%); OIL & GAS PRICES (78%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (78%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (76%); EMERGING MARKETS (67%); 
