3S8G-CF30-000B-Y1S8


The New York Times


GRIM OUTLOOK COLORS CANADIAN HOLIDAYS


19801226T000000Z


Grim economic prospects, symbolized by bitter political conflicts and a currency fallen to one of its lowest levels in almost half a century have cast such a pall upon the holiday season that even Governor General Edward Schreyer has felt unable to impart much cheer to his fellow citizens in his year-end greetings.
 
 ''Our modern times seem to be undergoing a period of pessimism and divisiveness,'' he said in a message prepared for delivery on New Year's Day. ''The phenomenon is worldwide and we in Canada are not exempt from it.''
 
 Mr. Schreyer called Canada one of the most privileged of nations, but said, ''We appear to be unable to appreciate fully this fact.'' In the midst of the gloom, Canadians appeared to be grateful for small fortunes. A decision by the United States Congress to rescind tax restrictions on Americans attending conventions in Canada and Mexico was reported here as ''a nice Christmas present.'' It was estimated that because of the restrictions in effect since 1976, millions of dollars of convention business had been lost by Canadian cities.
 
 Damage of U.S. Interest Rates
 
 Up to then, the American contribution to the local season had been one that Canadians could have done without. High interest rates in the United States have forced the Bank of Canada and the private banks to follow suit lest the Canadian dollar fall even further than it has. During the week, it dropped momentarily below 82.5 United States cents for the first time since 1933, but it has since strengthened slightly. Canada now has the highest interest rates in its history.
 
 For more than a week, the opposition in the House of Commons has assailed the Government with angry questions over the fate of homeowners unable to meet mortgage payments, of wage earners losing their jobs and of small businesses faced with bankruptcy. ''What are you going to do about it?'' the opposition has been asking. Before adjourning for the holidays in exhaustion, they asked it all last Thursday night and through most of Friday in an emergency debate that constituted the longest continuous sitting of the House since 1913.
 
 Finance Minister Allan MacEachan has had to throw up his hands and express hope for better times later on. ''We are not pursuing policies that are bringing about these interest rates,'' he told the opposition. ''These policies are being pursued by the Federal Reserve Bank in the United States.'' The Finance Minister indicated he might complain to the Federal Reserve about what it was doing to Canada.
 
 The avowal of helplessness in the face of policies made in the United States, which Canada has been forced to apply, has not helped the mood here because it has been another reminder of how the American economy dominates the Canadian one. Nor have the economic projections that have just been made for 1981 and beyond by the Government's Economic Council, in which inflation of 10 percent or more, 8 percent unemployment, low productivity and a decline in real wages are forecast. The inflation rate reached 11.3 percent last month. Political Divisions Abound
 
 The dismal economic prospects are being aggravated by some of the most bitter political divisions Canadians have ever seen. Attempts by the Government of Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau to impose constitutional and energy policies on the provinces without their consent have provoked angry reactions across the country, and the Governor General's appeal for cooperation in 1981 instead of ''selfishness and narrow regionalism'' ran the risk of falling on deaf ears.
 
 Premier Peter Lougheed of Alberta, a province that has more reasons to be jolly than most because of its oil and gas riches, described it last Sunday on a television broadcast as ''angry and frustrated'' because of what he saw as a federal attempt to seize control of the province's resources. A separatist movement has grown, and Mr.  Lougheed warned that ''if we continue in this province to feel that we're being treated unfairly and unjustly, those frustrations are going to grow and I'm not sure whether or not it's going to be possible for us to control it.''
 
 In Paris, where he made an official visit this week, Premier Rene Levesque of Quebec pictured his province as fighting to defend its distinctive French culture against federal constitutional moves. Both Premiers, along with four others, are embroiled in court battles with Ottawa and neither the energy nor the constitutional issue seems likely to be settled soon by negotiation.


HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (90%); ECONOMIC POLICY (89%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); INTEREST RATES (89%); CENTRAL BANKS (89%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (88%); PUBLIC FINANCE (88%); BANKING & FINANCE (86%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); CHRISTMAS (77%); BANKING & FINANCE REGULATION (75%); INSOLVENCY & BANKRUPTCY (73%); SMALL BUSINESS (73%); CURRENCIES (73%); HOMEOWNERS (73%); BANKING & FINANCE AGENCIES (70%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (70%); HOSPITALITY INDUSTRY (68%); WAGES & SALARIES (67%); LAYOFFS (66%); DISMISSALS (50%); 
