3S8G-CH50-000B-Y28B


The New York Times


MAJOR COMPANIES PLAN TO CUT OIL PURCHASES


19801210T000000Z


Western energy ministers agreed today at a meeting of the International Energy Agency to cut back the amount of oil they will buy on the world market during the first quarter of next year.
 
 They also agreed to make strong efforts to insure that the big international oil companies switch available supplies to help countries and other companies that are short and to step up efforts to conserve energy and develop new supplies.
 
 The moves are aimed at keeping oil-short governments from bidding up prices on the spot oil markets, where oil not under contract is traded.
 
 The planned reduction, from an estimated 264 million tons to 238 million tons, follows an estimated 32-million-ton drawdown of stocks in the current quarter. The move will lower overall stocks, which should amount to about 468 million tons at year-end, by 26 million tons. But the new 442-million-ton level will still be higher than last January's. Fragile World Economy
 
 At a meeting of the International Energy Agency, which includes all the major Western industrial nations except France, ministers emphasized the fragile state of the world's economy in pledging to continue using reserves to meet the supply shortfall caused by the Iran-Iraq war.
 
 After the Iranian revolution interrupted supplies last year, the soaring spot oil prices caused by frantic stockpiling led the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to increase its official levels. ''There is a real political commitment not to repeat that error,'' said Viscount Etienne Davignon, a member of the European Common Market's Executive Commission, who attended today's talks here.
 
 But I.E.A. members again rejected a United States call for new and stricter individual oil import ceilings, which would force some countries to institute gasoline rationing, conference sources said.
 
 Afterward the chairman of the meeting, Charles W. Duncan Jr., the outgoing United States Energy Secretary, said he did not believe import ceilings were necessary yet but that the I.E.A. countries were ready to adopt them at short notice if supplies became any scarcer. Several Key Questions
 
 As ministers acknowledged today, the success of the I.E.A. plan depends in part on the agency's ability to divide stocks equitably among countries, some of which have been seriously affected by the cutoff of Iranian and Iraqi supplies. Among the hardest-hit are Turkey and France, which though not in the I.E.A. is associated with its strategy as a member of the European Common Market.
 
 A key aspect of the strategy will be persuading the major international oil companies to cooperate.  Indeed, a crucial question is whether United States oil companies can cooperate in supply sharing without violating American antitrust law. A more serious political problem for the United States, sources say, is that the whole thrust of the joint I.E.A. plan, with its emphasis on running down stocks and reducing pressure o n the world oil price, runs counter to current American p lans to build up a huge strategic oil reserve to protect the country against future embargoes.
 
 Under existing I.E.A. rules, any country that suffers a 7 percent shortfall in oil supplies may activate an automatic emergency sharing agreement, forcing other countries and companies to divide up available supplies and suspending United States antitrust procedures. However, the I.E.A. countries have refused to bring the sharing agreement into force in the past for fear that this would merely touch off a speculative rush on the spot market.


ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); ENERGY DEPARTMENTS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (90%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (90%); SPOT MARKET (90%); CRUDE OIL & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (89%); PETROLEUM EXPORTS & IMPORTS (89%); IMPORT TRADE (89%); GASOLINE (78%); EXPORT TRADE (78%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (78%); OIL & GAS PRICES (78%); CARTELS (78%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (78%); OIL & GAS EXPORTS & IMPORTS (78%); ENERGY MARKETS (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (77%); ANTITRUST & TRADE LAW (50%); 
