3S8G-CK70-000B-Y2DY


The New York Times


ADVENT OF REAGAN WORRYING MEXICANS


19801124T000000Z


Alarmed by the prospect of a strongly probusiness administration in Washington, Mexican politicians have begun arguing that President Jose Lopez Portillo's successor should be a firm nationalist capable of withstanding increased pressure from the United States.
 
 Although President-elect Ronald Reagan has given no hint of his likely policies toward Mexico beyon d calling for improved ties, leftist and G overnment-party politicians have jumped to the conclusion th at his administration will seek greater United States control over Mexico's economy and energy resources.
 
 The main impact of Mr. Reagan's election on Mexico has therefore been felt in the debate over the succession here. ''A clearer sense of nationalism is our only way of defending ourselves against an alliance of United States and Mexican business sectors that has the full backing of Washington,'' a worried congressman said.
 
 President Lopez Portillo's six-year term ends in December 1982, but by next fall he must name the official candidate for the July 1982 elections. The ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party has won every presidential election since 1929.Criterion Is a Mystery
 
 Part of the mystery of Mexican politics is that no one knows what criterion Mr. Lopez Portillo will use to pick his successor or what kind of administration the new president will head once he is installed and out of the shadow of the man who placed him in power.
 
 Nevertheless, in the coming months, economic and political lobbies will step up their efforts to incline the President toward their favorites among the eight or so current contenders. Mr. Reagan's victory has in turn served to promote the most nationalist of political sectors.
 
 Until now, the ''pre-candidates'' were roughly divided into ''technocrats,'' who might be expected to maintain the current emphasis on economic planning and long-term development, and ''politicians,'' who might favor a more populist approach of channeling Mexico's mounting oil resources toward social welfare.
 
 But since the United States elections, the choice has been redefined as between those accepting closer economic and political ties with the United States and those committed to firmly nationalistic economic and foreign policies. In practice, it is impossible to place all the aspirants neatly into one or other category, but Mr. Reagan's victory has apparently established the context within which the succession will be decided. Oil Chief Is a Casualty
 
 The principal casualty of the Republican triumph among the ''precandidates'' appears to be Jorge Diaz Serrano, director general of Petroleos Mexicanos, the powerful state oil monopoly, who not only comes from the private sector but is also a former business associate of Vice President-elect George Bush. This intimacy with circles of power in the United States is considered suspect here and therefore is a serious drawback.
 
 In contrast, the Minister of Land Reform, Javi er Garcia Paniagua, has suddenly joined the ranks of serious cont enders after a speech inwhich he struck a strongly nationalistic note and called for the defense of Mexico's energy resources. Mr. Gar cia Paniagua, son of a former Defense Minister, has risen rapidly du ring the current administration, though some politicians are c learly worried by his links with the Mexican Army.
 
 The other possible candidates are seen to fall between the probusiness position of Mr. Diaz Serrano and the bare nationalism of Mr. Garcia Paniagua. Interior Minister Enrique Olivares Santana, Labor Minister Pedro Ojeda Paullada and Trade Minister Jorge de la Vega Dominguez are regarded as offering ''political'' solutions, and Planning and Budget Minister Miguel de la Madrid, Finance Minister David Ibarra Munoz and Education Minister Fernando Solana have the reputation of being ''technocrats.''
 
 Even though the outcome of the succession race will not be known until the party announces its candidate, the current debate is serving the useful purpose of focusing on the nature of both Mexico's development model and the country's relations with the United States. Danger in Foreign Affairs
 
 At one level, there appears to be no strong reason for relations to deteriorate under Mr. Reagan, particularly if Washington continues to recognize Mexico's right to determine its own energy policy.  Furthermore, Mr. Reagan may feel less pressed than a Democrat to control illegal migration by Mexicans seeking jobs north of the border.
 
 In foreign affairs, though, there may be more room for disagreement, particularly if the Reagan administration becomes more involved in trying to crush leftist insurgents in El Salvador and Guatemala and adopts a policy of isolating Nicaragua's revolutionary Government. Mexico, strongly opposed to outside intervention in Central America, has expressed sympathy for the opposition movements in El Salvador and Guatemala and has warm ties with Nicaragua.
 
 But the main concern aroused by Mr. Reagan's victory among Mexican politicians is that it will consolidate the growing political strength of big business here and weaken the state's authority and abili ty to pr eserve stability.
 
 One of the results of the current oil-f@inanced economic boom has been the emergence of vast Mexican-owned conglomerates that have close links with United States-owned transnational corporations.  These conglomerates have diversified their activities dramatically over the last four years, benefiting enormously from Governmentprovided fiscal incentives and subsidized energy sources.
 
 ''Mexican politics have always been run along consensus lines, but now the private sector is strong enough to challenge the political consensus,'' an experienced analyst said. ''It can't go as far as naming Lopez Portillo's successor, but it can limit his subsequent freedom of movement.''


UNITED STATE INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  ELECTIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); POLITICS (90%); ECONOMIC POLICY (89%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (77%); LOBBYING (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (75%); FOREIGN POLICY (72%); LEGAL MONOPOLIZATION (60%); 
