3S8G-CJK0-000B-Y0SX


The New York Times


'SHELTER NEEDY' AID HOME MARKET


19801130T000000Z


With rising interest rates depressing home sales, the residential real-estate market in the suburban metropolitan area is being supported mainly by what one real-estate market consultant in Connecticut calls ''the shelter-needy.'' They are the people who feel compelled to buy a home as soon as possible because of shrinking rental opportunities, inflation fears, job relocations or marriage split-ups.
 
 Sales are sharply down from last year. On Long Island, 12,498 housing units were sold in the first 10 months of this year compared with 14,841 for the same period in 1979, a 15.7 percent decline, according to the Long Island Multiple Listing Service. The Westchester Multiple Listing Service shows 1,943 sales, compared with 2,675 for the same period last year, a 27.3 percent decline. In Connecticut for the same period, the drop was 25.7 percent - to 42,762 houses from 57,610. The weakness is not evenly spread. The mark et resembles a quilt with areas of strength interspersed with weak ness and some types of homes selling faster than others.
 
 Communities in more accessible locations such as Huntington on Long Island and Teaneck, N. J., are still busy, say bankers, brokers and relocation experts. At the same time they find that the market in peripheral areas like the residential towns around Danbury, Conn., and in Ocean County, N.J., has already slowed down even more than would be expected for this traditionally quieter time of year.
 
 The emerging ''shelter-needy'' buyers also appear to have partly offset an estimated 12 percent decrease in reloc ation activity - normally an i mportant factor in maintaining sales activity. Further confusing thi s fall's marketplace is an apparent excessive demand forsmaller homes . ''People are scaling down in terms of size regardless of their abil ity to pay,'' noted Margaret Rydzik, a Greenwich broker.
 
 The luxury market appears to be less affected ''possibly because these people are less affected by interest charges,'' noted Carll S.  Burr, a Long Island broker. However, if interest rates remain at their present level for an extended period or rise even further, brokers are concerned that a majority of would-be buyers needing bank financing would be discouraged.
 
 ''We are scared,'' said Mr. Burr.  A national perspective on the situation is provided by figures collected by the National Association of Realtors. These show that 1980 need not be viewed as a drastic slide but rather an adjustment to the volume that prevailed earlier in the 70's. The country had its top number of home sales, 3.9 million, in 1978. In 1979 total sales dropped to 3.7 million. The association estimates that in 1980 sales will drop even further to 2.9 million, or 25.6 percent below the alltime record set in 1978. In 1973, the association recorded 2.3 million home sales; in 1974, 2.2 million and in 1975, 2.4 million.
 
 ''The difference between this market recession and the one in 1973-74 is that today you have a backlog of demand without a corresponding overhang of supply of new homes,'' said a spokesman for the association. ''Today it is an affordability problem. In the last recession there was excessive supply coupled with lack of mortgage money.''
 
 In new home sales, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board reported sales for the first nine months of this year were down 28 percent over last year.
 
 Earlier in the year most communities in the metropolitan area had excessive numbers of homes for sale, but brokers now report that inventory is low almost everywhere.
 
 On Long Island, for instance, there have been 5,691 fewer listings in the first nine months of this year compared to the same period a year earlier, according to the Long Island Multiple Listing Service.  Most of that inventory was depleted during the late summer rush.  ''We're now very short of properties for sale,'' said Joseph Mottola, executive vice president of the Long Island Board of Realtors.
 
 In Westchester there were 4,305 listings by the end of October, compared to 4,868 last year, a decline of 11.5 percent.  ''Nobody is moving unless they really have to do so this winter,'' added Simone Englander, a Scarsdale, N.Y., broker. ''They don't want to give up their cheaper mortgages. They're remodeling instead of trading.''
 
 Nevertheless, prices are still inching upward. Most of this year's increases occurred during a late summer rush when interest rates dropped to around 12 percent. For instance, although the average price of a house on Long Island stayed around $50,000 for the first half of the year, it spurted forward from $53,139 in June to $57,700 by October, according to the Multiple Listing Service.
 
 The National Association of Realtors also predicted that the average increase in house prices is expected to level off at about 11 percent for the year.
 
 A desire to live nearer to the job -both because of rising commuting costs as well as the growing number of households with wives in the work force - is now also said to be having an impact on established sales patterns. Until the end of the 70's, outlying suburbs that offered less expensive but new homes were so popular that the builders scarcely finished painting the walls before the moving van was at the door. Properties in these dormitory towns are being eclipsed as would-be buyers favor older communities in neighborhoods close to centers of employment or major rail connections.
 
 ''Buyers historically traded off price for journey,'' explained Mr. Mattola. ''But you can't do that anymore because the economics don't work.'' While the increased costs of carrying a more expensive house are tax deductible, he explained, there is nothing comparable to cover gasoline bills or commutation tickets.
 
 That is why he believes that on Long Island properties in Nassau County are now appreciating faster than those in Suffolk County.  According to the Long Island Multiple Listing Service, an average Nassau County house now costs 17.3 percent mo re than it did at this time a year ago. By contrast, a home in Suffo lk County is only 11.8 percent higher than it was late in 1979.
 
 The same shift in demand patterns is also occurring in New Jersey.  Barry Haverman, president of H. S. H. Associates, a data-processing concern that surveys lending institutions on a weekly basis to determine rates, fees and policies, notes that outlying communities in southern Monmouth and Ocean Counties are showing the slowest sales activity of all. ''The cost of gas has a lot to do with it,'' he said. In Fairfiel d County, Conn., brokers say older communities such as Stratford - w hich is strategically located on Long Island Sound and close to main rail connections into Stamford, New York City and New Haven, and wh ich was built up with clusters of small homes - are experiencing brisker sales activity.
 
 ''We didn't want to have to rely on a car,'' explained Teri Cassidy. Teri and Philip Cassidy purchased an older, three-bedroom colonial in Stratford for $80,000 in July. It was important, added Mrs. Cassidy, that they were within walking distance to shopping and that her husband had only to drive 10 minutes to work.
 
 Further inland the Greater Danbury Board of Realtors is finding that it is now taking 23.9 percent longer to sell a home compared to a year ago - 146 instead of 111 days. There have also been 32.8 percent fewer sales in that area so far compared to 1979.
 
 The reason why there seems to be so much pressure on smaller, less expensive homes, say brokers, is because so many different types of buyers now need them: first-time purchasers unable to afford anything else; slightly more affluent people forced to lower their sights because of rising interest charges; singles and divorced individuals or single parents moving into smaller quarters.
 
 ''When there was a divorce it used to be that the wife and children stayed in the house and the husband rented an apartment in the city,'' observed Ross Strickland, a mortgage officer on Long Island.  ''Now they immediately try to sell that big $150,000 five-bedroom Colonial and come in looking for two smaller, three-bedroom ranches for about $60,000 each.''
 
 Such a scramble has been especially hard on first-time buyers.  ''Young people we know say they're frightened that they will now never own a home at all,'' said Terry Kirkpatrick, a writer. He and his wife, Jeri, bought their first home, a 70-year-old, $69,000 three-bedroom frame house in Ossining in October. ''You feel you're caught up in a game with everyone telling you to act fast,'' he said.
 
 Further dampening sales activity is the continued cutback in relocation activity. Volume is down by at least 12 percent compared to last year, according to recent estimates made by Merrill Lynch Relocation Management, one of the largest relocation assistance firms. Patricia Mattison, its director of marketing, predicts that if interest rates hold at present high levels even fewer people may be transferred next year. One of the reasons she cites is that corporations now normally have to offer a mortgage-interest differential between what the employee was paying on the old home compared to what it costs to carry a loan on the house in the new location.
 
 In addition, Homequity, another national major relocation service, points to the growing tendency of employees being relocated for only very limited time periods to hold on to the original house and rent in the new location.
 
 The most recent increases in mortgage rates are creating a situation, say bankers and relocation experts, wherein some of the financing techniques tried out during the springtime are being used again. ''There's a lot more participation in the mortgage process by sellers,'' said Mr. Haverman. ''Techniques used in commercial real estate are now very much a part of residential transactions.''
 
 Both Merrill Lynch Relocation Management and Homequity are also finding that prearranged financing is one of the most effective tools for marketing properties taken over as part of their relocation services.
 
 Mr. Strickland also observed that more buyers were surprising both brokers and bankers by coming up with larger downpayments.


HOUSING; INTEREST (MONEY); REAL ESTATE  HOUSING MARKET (93%); REAL ESTATE (92%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (91%); INTEREST RATES (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (90%); CITIES (90%); REAL ESTATE LISTING SERVICES (78%); BANKING & FINANCE (78%); SALES PROJECTIONS (78%); INFLATION (73%); SALES FIGURES (73%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (60%); 
