3S8G-CJY0-000B-Y1P6


The New York Times


BANKS RAISE PRIME TO 17 3 4%; INCREASE IS FOURTH THIS MONTH


19801127T000000Z


Dozens of the nation's largest banks announced yesterday that they were increasing their prime lending rates to 17 3/4 percent from 17 percent, the fourth rise this month.
 
 Only last Friday, most banks increased their prime rates to 17 percent from 16 1/4. At the beginning of the month the rate was 14 1/2.
 
 The San Francisco-based Wells Fargo Bank, the nation's 11th largest, went a step further than most others yesterday and increased its prime rate a full percentage point, to 18 percent.
 
 Nervous Atmosphere
 
 The latest increases were made in a particularly nervous atmosphere, with banks uncertain whether interest rates would continue rising or had peaked. ''We're in a probing area where bankers have not made up their minds about where interest rates mightpeak,'' said Frederick W. Deming, senior vice president and economistat the Chemical Bank.
 
 Some bankers said that the higher cost of borrowing could cause another recession and that consumers would be among the first to be affected by the general rise in interest-rate levels.
 
 ''We're right at the point where the prime is going to exert a depressing effect on the economy because many companies will find it hard to afford these rates,'' said Thomas S. Johnson, an executive vice president at Chemical.
 
 The prime is the rate that banks charge on ordinary business loans to their biggest corporate customers even though these borrowers are often able to borrow short-term funds below that level. Although most consumers are not directly affected by the prime rate, the prime reflects general inter est-rate levels. The latest increases will cause funds f or mortgages and other consumer purposes to dry up, Mr. Johnson predi cted.
 
 ''This increases the risk of a sharper economic slowdown in 1981,'' said Jay N. Woodworth, a vice president at the Bankers Trust Company.  Bankers attributed yesterday's increase in the prime to rapidly rising costs of their own funds. For example, the rate on Federal funds, overnight money that banks trade among themselves, climbed to almost 19 percent yesterday. This was about five percentage points higher than the average Federal funds rate during the first week of November.
 
 The Chase Manhattan Bank was the first to announce the upward move yesterday. It was quickly followed by such other major banks as the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company, the Chemical Bank, the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company and the two largest banks in Chicago, the First National Bank and the Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Company.
 
 Participants in the money markets said yesterday that they were uncertain whether the Federal Reserve felt that its actions over the last few weeks had been sufficient to reduce the rate of growth in the money supply so that such growth would fall within the central bank's targets. Pressure on the Federal Reserve is particularly intense at this point, they said, because the end of the year is approaching.
 
 The Federal Reserve does not want to overdo monetary restraint because this could lead to a new recession. Similarly, it does not want to allow the money supply to keeping growing too rapidly because, many economists say, that would heighten inflationary pressures.
 
 The latest money-supply figures indicate that M-1B, made up of currency in the hands of the public and all types of checking accounts at banks and other financial institutions, is about $6 billion above what it should be at the end of the year. This indicates that, to achieve its targets, the Federal Reserve would have to cut the amount of money available to the public.
 
 There is no way, however, in which the Federal Reserve can predict exactly what effect its actions might have on the money-supply numbers, especially for the short run. The Federal Reserve, by buying securities from the money markets, adds reserves to the banking system. As these reserves are used, mainly as a result of demand for funds by the economy, new money is created.
 
 Economists, however, have not been able to establish a generally accepted model to determine what amount of reserves it takes to have a specific effect on the money supply. The problem is also complicated by the fact that there is usually a time lag of several months before the actions of the Fed are fully reflected in the money supply numbers.
 
 Banks and other money market participants, and probably the Federal Reserve itself, are therefore uncertain about whether the central bank's tightening in recent weeks has been sufficient to slow the growth of the money supply.
 
 ''It's a very difficult time,'' said Wayne D. Lyski, vice president of the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company. He added that the period was particularly uncertain because of recent changes in the amounts of reserves that banks and others must maintain with the Federal Reserve.


PRIME RATE; INTEREST (MONEY)  PRIME RATES (96%); ECONOMIC NEWS (93%); INTEREST RATES (93%); COMMERCIAL BANKING (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); US FEDERAL FUNDS RATES (89%); EXECUTIVES (88%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (85%); ECONOMIC DECLINE (78%); RECESSION (78%); CENTRAL BANKS (78%); COMMERCIAL LENDING (78%); MORTGAGE BANKING & FINANCE (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (73%); MONEY SUPPLY (60%); 
