3S8G-CFW0-000B-Y407


The New York Times


ABOUT REAL ESTATE;NONEVICTION CONVERSION IS UNDER WAY AT GLEN OAKS VILLAGE


19801219T000000Z


Six years ago Harry B. Helmsley, the owner-developer, began an ambitious effort to convert Parkchester, an enormous rental housing development in the Bronx, into a condominium, using a procedure that was then new. Tenants could stay on as renters if they chose not to buy, but apartments could be sold to outsiders once they became vacant.
 
 Opposition from anticonversion tenants was strong, the procedure notwithstanding. Legal challenges delayed the offering, mortgage rates rose and the conversion effort never expanded beyond the initial phase, which involved only a third of Parkchester's 12,000 apartments.
 
 But the noneviction conversion method has since been used elsewhere. In housing developments with hundreds or thousands of apartments, it is often viewed in the city as the only way to achieve a transition to owner-occupancy. And owner-occupancy is probably the best hope of achieving long-term stability, decent maintenance and essential new investment in unsubsidized urban multifamily housing.
 
 Accordingly, the ''conversion business'' has become one of the most active forms of urban residential real estate. A key test of the success of noneviction conversion effort in Queens got under way officially last month at Glen Oaks Village, in the Glen Oaks section, which with 2,880 garden apartments is one of the city's largest lowrise rental developments. Block after block of neat garden apartments along the winding streets of Glen Oaks have at one time or other been home to countless thousands who are now Long Island residents.
 
 The owner, Gerald Guterman, has presented residents with a $107.1 million offering plan in which current prices are skewed to encourage sales to residents: $125 a share to occupying tenants, $100 a share to elderly tenants who make up perhaps a quarter of the tenancy and $197 a share to nonoccupants.
 
 The three-room apartment is assigned 104 shares; the four-room, 142 shares and the five-room, 160 shares. This works out, as an example, to an insider price of $13,000 for a three-room apartment, $10,400 to elderly persons and $20,500 to outsiders.
 
 The buyer does not get an ''as-is'' apartment. Apartments are redone with new kitchen equipment, flooring and painting. In addition, turnover and vacancies are sufficient at Glen Oaks to allow some apartment reconstruction. Thus the sponsor is also offering town-house apartments of six or seven rooms on two floors.  An insider can buy a six-room, three-bedroom town house for $38,000.  Tenants get the insider price even if they buy an apartment in substitution of their own.
 
 Room sizes are modest at Glen Oaks, which was built 30 years ago with Federal mortgage insurance. Financing of 75 percent of the sale price for 25 years at 12 percent interest is offered to tenants who apply for a loan by Jan. 31. According to the on-premises sales agent, about 80 tenants bought in the first 14 days of selling, which began Dec. 1. Prices to tenants cannot be raised for 90 days. The management says it has received 400 purchase applications so far from outsiders.
 
 What all this means in changing the monthly housing costs of tenants varies markedly depending on the tenant's current rent. And at Glen Oaks, rents vary widely, in typical New York fashion, depending on when the tenant moved in. Some tenants are said by management to be paying only $60 a room per month. Others have rented at $100 or more a month.
 
 The property has the benefit of a $32 million mortgage with an 8 percent constant monthly debt-service charge. The opportunity to utilize a favorable existing mortgage is one factor that tempts sponsors to convert to a cooperative rather than a condominium, which may require total new financing at current interest rates.
 
 All tenants are not content with the Glen Oaks offering. There have been complaints of inadequate services and repairs in recent months, and about 150 families have participated in a rent-withholding action that has wound up in court. On weekends, pickets have appeared at the sales office.
 
 The conversion plan itself is criticized, for example, on the ground that the $1.5 million reserve fund it provides is grossly inadequate. And, depending on how many tenants buy, it may be a long while before the occupying cooperators truly control the development's management.
 
 Mr. Guterman is 38 years old, outspoken and comes from a family long in the building business. In an exchange of property with a former partner, he came to own some 16,000 apartments in the metropolitan area. In 1978 he decided that rentals were no longer a ''viable form of housing'' because they were not profitable on a daily basis and had little resale value. At present interest rates, rental buildings cannot be successfully refinanced when that becomes necessary, he said.
 
 So he has gone into conversions on a large scale. On a drive along Grand Central Parkway in Queens, he gestured to left and right at handsome apartment houses and predicted that most of them, in time, would be converted. That will also mean new investment in building improvements, he said, to make apartments salable on the open market.


REAL ESTATE (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); RESIDENTIAL CO-OWNERSHIP (90%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (90%); RENTAL PROPERTY (90%); URBAN DEVELOPMENT (90%); REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENT (90%); CONDOMINIUMS (90%); RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY (90%); MULTIFAMILY REAL ESTATE (78%); RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUMS (78%); MULTIFAMILY MORTGAGES (76%); MORTGAGE RATES (76%); MORTGAGE INSURANCE (71%); INTEREST RATES (71%); AGING (63%); SENIOR CITIZENS (63%); MORTGAGE LOANS (56%); 
