3S8G-CHM0-000B-Y3G1


The New York Times


PATERSON TO TURN OLD MILLS INTO HOMES AND STUDIOS FOR ARTISTS


19801207T000000Z


PATERSON APROJECT designed to convert two vacant 19th-century mill buildings into federally subsidized apartments and studio space for working artists -the first attempt at residential usage in the Great Falls Historic District - is under way here.
 
 City officials envision the 146-unit project as an economic development tool specifically designed to introduce new purchasing power, business opportunity and employment to the area, the nation's oldest industrial section and once a prosperous manufacturing center.
 
 The Great Falls Historic District, a 118-acre tract, lies between the Great Falls of the Passaic River and Paterson's central business district. Since the area was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1976, the city has taken major steps to restore some of its 40-odd mills and turn them into business and commercial space.
 
 The proposed residential development, whose cost is estimated at $8.8 million, is scheduled for completion within 18 months. It was approved by the City Council on Nov. 11, and city officials are now seeking financing through a mortgage approved and insured by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development.
 
 The units will be rented by the city under H.U.D.-approved guidelines. No artist would have to pay rent of more than 25 percent of his or her income, provided that income fell within the program's limits. The limits vary according to family size, from $14,000 a year for a two-person family to $17,000 for a family of four.
 
 The formula is similar to the one used by the Manhattan Plaza in New York City's theater district, a high-rise whose tenants are drawn from the performing arts.
 
 ''Our intention is to create a neighborhood that will be compatible to and supportive of young artists with limited incomes,'' said Sidney L. Willis, the city's Director of Community Development. ''By giving them the opportunity to be together, we hope to generate a whole new atmosphere that will attract public attention to a presently abandoned urban setting that has its own beauty and historic interest.'' Mr. Willis explained that the development of an arts and crafts industry with in the district also would require the establishment of a full range of services now in the design stage.
 
 ''To a large extent, the changes will be gradual, but positive,'' he said. ''Just the fact of 146 families living in this particular area will have an immediate impact on local business. Soho (in Manhattan) is an illustration of what happens as a result of introducing a new population into an area that was in a declining situation.''
 
 Some local artists already have moved into downtown Paterson and the Historic District, having been drawn there by the availability of loft space and the distinct ambience created by the collection of red-brick mills clustered along the banks of the Passaic River.
 
 Mr. Willis said that the selection of tenants would be one of the most difficult aspects of the project.  ''We want to keep as high a standard for artistic achievement as possible,'' he said, noting that the definition of artist would be taken in its broadest context to include not only artisans allied to the visual arts and crafts, but also those who work in affiliated cultural fields, such as teaching and arts administration.
 
 The city recently asked the State Council on the Arts to assist in the selection process, in conjunction with the Greater Paterson Arts Council and the Great Falls Development Corporation.
 
 The two mills slated for conversion are the 110-year-old Essex Mill on Mill Street, a privately owned, four-story structure in which mosquito netting was manufactured, and the Phoenix Mill on Van Houten Street, the oldest remaining building in the Historic District.
 
 Built in 1812, the Phoenix was the largest silk-producing mill in the country at a time when Paterson was a leader in the manufacture of textiles and locomotives. The state's Department of Transportation acquired the building some years ago because it lay in the path of a proposed highway, which the city successfully opposed.
 
 Stephen B. Jacob s of New York City, a promi nent restoration architect and an authority on the recycling o f old industrial sites, is designing the residential units. Daniel Re gan Associates of Yonkers is the developer.
 
 The apartments will be one-or two-bedroom units featuring a minimum of interior walls to provide as much open space and natural light as possible. Each unit will be spa-cious enough to accommodate gallery, display and practice areas. For those artists who want to work elsewhere, the city plans to lease additional studio space in other mill buildings.
 
 The overall restoration of the Historic District is already under way, with $16 million in Federal and state grants having been received by the city in the last several years.
 
 The former Rogers Locomotive building on Spruce Street has undergone an accurate restoration: the ground floor is a museum and the upper floors are rented for office space. Last summer, a crafts show held in the museum area of the building attracted thousands of visitors.
 
 Next door is the 1891 Union mill, once a textile factory and now a church-related primary school. An electronics assembly company is upstairs.
 
 Further evidence includes reconstruction of the streets, sidewalks and sewers in the district, as well as the stone fencing along the course of an elaborate raceway system once used to direct the water from above the Great Falls to power the mills.
 
 City officials point to Mayor Lawrence F. Kramer as one of the prime movers behind the revitalization of the district. An outspoken advocate of the adaptive reuse of valued properties from the past, the Mayor spoke enthusiastically about the proposed artists' colony.
 
 ''A project of this type involving the arts will give the district a stronger backbone,'' he said. ''It brings a dimension that I think is exciting and meaningful.
 
 ''The work we've already done in the entire district has progressed to the point where we're really ready for people - and people are what it's all about.''


CITIES (92%); HISTORIC DISTRICTS & STRUCTURES (91%); REAL ESTATE (90%); HOUSING ASSISTANCE (90%); URBAN DEVELOPMENT (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (90%); RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY (90%); ARTISTS & PERFORMERS (90%); PUBLIC HOUSING (90%); FAMILY (89%); HOUSING AUTHORITIES (78%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (78%); VISUAL ARTISTS (78%); VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (78%); CONSTRUCTION (78%); REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENT (78%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (77%); APPROVALS (77%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (77%); MANUFACTURING OUTPUT (76%); POPULATION & DEMOGRAPHICS (73%); HISTORIC SITES (72%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (72%); THEATER (63%); 
