3S8G-CJV0-000B-Y1B2


The New York Times


NEW PROJECT BY SAGNER REFLECTS WEAKNESS IN JERSEY SALES


19801128T000000Z


The old Eisler estate on Wyoming Avenue was widely known beyond the limits of this elegant Essex County community years ago. The owner manufactured electric products and every Christmas season he lit up his lawn and home with a display that brought sightseers from afar.
 
 Temple B'nai Abraham, then based in Newark, bought the property a dozen years ago and used it as a school and ancillary temple. In 1973 B'nai Abraham moved to a new synagogue in Livingston, but it kept the South Orange property as a school and ancillary temple until three years ago. Then it sold the four-acre South Orange property to Alan Sagner.
 
 Mr. Sagner is the chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. He was appointed to its board of commissioners by Governor Byrne, whose first gubernatorial campaign he served and who named him State Transportation Commissioner in 1974.
 
 Pol itical a ctivities have been a Sagner sideline since the days of Adlai E. Stev enson. But professionally, Mr. Sagner is a builder of homes. With h is brother-in-law, he has built more than 2,500 houses in New Jersey since 1946 under the name of Levin Sagner Homes.
 
 Now, having left the transportation post three years ago, he is back in the business of building homes with his son-in-law, Gregory Pouliot. They are building a small luxury condominium project called Wyoming Gate on the old Eisler estate at 321 Wyoming Avenue. There are 16 houses in four buildings -12 of them already sold - selling for $189,000 to $205,000.
 
 In one sense, this would seem a can't miss project from a builder's viewpoint. Mr. Sagner lives in South Orange and he is producing customized homes meant to appeal to many of his own affluent neighbors - those who have perhaps tired of caring for their finely landscaped private houses.
 
 With them in mind, the builders have produced town houses with 3,100 to 3,600 square feet of finished living space, each with a private quarry-tiled courtyard entrance. They provide what might be described as ranch living in a three-story house since the ground level, in addition to its spacious living room, dining room and kitchen, has a master bedroom suite of 630 square feet taking up almost half of the first floor.
 
 The lower level, with a room 18 feet by 30 feet and a full bath, is intended mainly as an entertainment area or perhaps for offices. The upper level is a self-contained guest apartment overlooking the cathedral living room, with a bedroom, den and bath. Daniel Cahill was the design architect.
 
 The flooring is oak. The plumbing and appliances are top of the line. The cabinets are custom made and there are 42 linear feet of them in the 16-foot-by-19-foot kitchen. Each house has a two-car garage with electronic controls, and a burglar and fire alarm system covers the entire project.
 
 The entry road sweeps around two beech trees that have trunks two feet in diameter. Two Japanese maples that were in the way of the buildings were moved and replanted at a cost of $5,000. And at the rear of the property is a large outdoor swimming pool.
 
 Nevertheless, it has turned out to be a tough sales market even for Wyoming Gate. Affluent buyers worry whether they can sell their own homes in the current mortgage market, and therefore hesitate to buy a new one.
 
 Statewide, sales of new houses are weaker even than than they were in the 1974-75 recession, said Jack Schwartz, chairman of Mortgage Brokerage Services in East Orange. Mortgage rates of 14 percent to 15 percent have slowed or halted home production throughout central and northern New Jersey.
 
 ''We're delighted we have little or no inventory left,'' said Sanford Borinsky, who is building a condominium project called Essex Green Villa off Mount Pleasant Avenue in West Orange. The foundations are in for the second section of 30 houses, he added, but construction stopped three months ago. ''Sales have dried up,'' he said.
 
 Nearby, off Prospect Avenue at the 498-unit Villas at Eagle Ridge Club, a joint venture of the National Kinney Corporation and the Eastern Savings Bank, Michael Cordella, vice president of the joint venture company, said that the slack period had run on for 14 to 18 months since $10 million of sales in under two months after the first section opened.
 
 Current prices run from $158,000 to $250,000 for units with 1,850 to 2,750 square feet, but after putting up 80 houses in the 16 buildings of the first section the builder has returned a handful of deposits for the second section while awaiting a better sales market. But work continues on a $1.5 million clubhouse with a 20-footby-40-foot indoor pool and two outdoor pools.
 
 People cannot sell their own houses, Mr. Cordella said, so they hesitate to buy. A ''realistic'' interest rate that would rewaken sales would be in the range of 10 percent to 12 percent, he added.
 
 The slowdown has reached into the Sagner family as well. Mr.  Pouliot also is a partner in Pouliot Frieland Inc., which is building 110 custom homes on 80 acres in Livingston. There is little activity at present on the site.


ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS; MORTGAGES; RATES; HOUSING; SALES; CONTRACTS  REAL ESTATE (91%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); INTEREST RATES (90%); RESIDENTIAL CO-OWNERSHIP (90%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (90%); CONDOMINIUMS (90%); RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION (90%); MORTGAGE LOANS (79%); HOUSING MARKET (77%); CHRISTMAS (77%); APPOINTMENTS (75%); MORTGAGE RATES (74%); CITY GOVERNMENT (74%); BOARD CHANGES (74%); GOVERNORS (73%); TRENDS (72%); PORT AUTHORITIES (54%); 
