3S8G-CFT0-000B-Y3R3


The New York Times


FED MEMBER SAYS BOARD POLICY HAS HELPED WEAKEN ECONOMY


19801220T000000Z


The economy has moved into a stage of pronounced weakness, partly because of excessive monetary restraint by the Federal Reserve, Nancy H. Teeters, a Fed governor, says. As a result, she predicts, ''real'' output of goods and services will decline after inflation adjustment at least through the first quarter of next year.
 
 Mrs. Teeters, the sole dissenter against central bank policies that have sent interest rates to historic highs, said in an interview yesterday that she would have stopped tightening the valves six weeks ago.
 
 Statistics, she noted, lag behind the actual performance of the economy. ''Our reports from the Federal Reserve districts show that housing has been practically closed down,'' she said. But latest figures for housing starts in November, she added, showed only a modest annual rate of decline of four-tenths of 1 percent.
 
 'Rates Are Too High'
 
 ''It's very simple,'' said Mrs. Teeters, sitting by a roaring fire in her office. ''Rates are too high. You don't need to go to 20 or 21 percent to restrain the monetary aggregates.''
 
 She was referring to current levels of both the prime rate, a measure of what banks charge on loans to their best corporate customers, and to the rate on Federal funds, reserves that banks lend to each other, generally overnight, to meet reserve requirements. The two rates generally go hand in hand.
 
 Through its open market operations of buying and selling Treasury securities, the Fed controls the quantity of reserves in the banking system and thus influences the cost of Federal funds, a significant measure of the cost of money.
 
 The Fed's policy-setting Open Market Committee, consisting of the seven governors and five of the 12 presidents of Federal Reserve district banks, held its monthly meeting today.
 
 The committee, which has pushed up the cost of Federal funds to more than 20 percent from 12 1/2 percent in late October, was to determine a directive for guidance over the next month on appropriate levels for this rate. The results of the meeting will not be disclosed for more than a month. Fed Policies Supported
 
 Lee Gunderson, president of the American Bankers Association, predicted yesterday that the prime rate would go ''a little higher'' - it rose to 21 1/2 percent today - and said that significant Federal spending cuts and a sharply reduced Federal budget deficit were the basic ingredients for ''affordable'' interest rates in the future.
 
 In an unusual public statement Mr. Gunderson supported Fed policies as ''the only game in town'' to combat inflation, and sought to defuse criticism by some borrowers that banks are pushing up lending rates excessively.
 
 He said that the Government, because of its huge borrowing requirements, was ''crowding businesses and consumers out of the credit market.''
 
 Mr. Gunderson added: ''Banks are not the cause of inflation. High interest rates are not the cause of inflation -they are in fact the result of inflation and Federal budget deficits.''
 
 Growth in loan demand, brought on by recovery of the economy in the third and fourth quarters from the unusually sharp 9 1/2 percent drop in output in the second quarter, has contributed to the sharp run-up in interest rates, Mrs. Teeters observed.
 
 But she noted that consumers and many businesses ''are now finding rates so high that demand for funds is drying up.'' Speaking for the commercial banks, Mr. Gunderson, who is also president of the Bank of Osceola in Osceola, Wis., agreed that there were certain sectors of the economy that are ''really hurting,'' such as autos and housing.
 
 But he added, ''Other sectors are booming along and still putting a lot of pressure on the availability of funds.'' He cited energy and high technology. A 'Slowdown' Predicted
 
 ''Certainly we'll have some problems as a result of what's happening now,'' he said. But he predicted a ''slowdown'' rather than a new recession.
 
 Mrs. Teeters, who had been chief economist for the Joint Economic Committee of Congress before her appointment to the Federal Reserve Board by President Carter, noted that the Fed had overshot its monetary growth targets for 1980.
 
 But she said that when adjustments were made for the aggressive marketing of Automatic Transfer Services that banks provide in shifting funds from savings to checking accounts, the growth of M-1B would be only about one-half a percentage point above the target.
 
 ''Relatively speaking, I think that's pretty good,'' she said.  ''It's certainly better than some of our European partners.'' M-1B, the most widely monitored measure of the money supply, includes currency in circulation and checking deposits, including those covered by the Automatic Transfer facilities.


ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); INTEREST RATES (89%); PRIME RATES (89%); REAL ESTATE (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (78%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (78%); MONEY SUPPLY (78%); CENTRAL BANKS (78%); BUDGETS (78%); PUBLIC FINANCE (77%); STATISTICS (76%); BANKING & FINANCE ASSOCIATIONS (76%); CONSTRUCTION (74%); TREASURY SECURITIES (73%); HOUSING STARTS (72%); INTERBANK LENDING (65%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (65%); NATIONAL DEBT (64%); BUDGET DEFICITS (60%); 
