3S8G-CF30-000B-Y1RG


The New York Times


CALDOR FORMULA PROVIDES RARE RETAILING SUCCESS


19801226T000000Z


Many of the nation's leading retailers are reeling from the impact of soaring interest rates and the economic slowdown on consumer spending, but Caldor Inc. appears unscathed.
 
 The chain, which operates 63 stores in southern New England and the Hudson River Valley, reported solid sales gains in the latest period - a trend that continued through the Christmas selling season. And the company is pursuing an aggressive expansion program that will take it into several new states by 1983, a move that may test the company's self-image as a tightly managed regional retailer.
 
 The Caldor formula, which combines some of the features of department store sales and the techniques of discount chains, apparently works well when economic conditions force consumers to shop more carefully. For the latest nine months, ending last Oct. 25, Caldor's profits rose 12 percent, to $9.4 million, from $8.4 million. Sales increased by 18.1 percent, to $430.4 million, from $364.5 million.
 
 Broad Appeal Found
 
 Walter F. Loeb, a vice president and retailing analyst at Morgan Stanley and Company, said: ''The company is, in my opinion, one of the really excellent upscale discounters that has an appeal not only to the budget-minded blue-collar worker but to the middle-class white-collar shopper, too. It's a well-thought-out formula with some fashion appeal.''
 
 That formula is expressed in 85,000-square-foot stores offering first-quality brand-name merchandise and an appealing earth-tone color scheme.
 
 Caldor's clientele, according to Carl Bennett, chairman and president, who founded the company in 1951, is ''middle to upper income, a customer who wants better-quality merchandise and appreciates shopping in a pleasant atmosphere with knowledgeable, trained personnel.''
 
 In sharp contrast to other discounters, Caldor features such events as autographing parties for authors of new books, and the chain has even acquired a certain chic. An article extolling the virtues of Caldor ran last year in Connecticut magazine, which caters to the residents of affluent Fairfield County.
 
 Because Caldor carries first-quality goods, Mr. Bennett said, ''we notice in a recession that many of the so-called better-income customers will shop our stores for children's clothing they would normally buy at department stores.'' Inventories Firmly Controlled
 
 The company's merchandising flair is matched by rigorous control of inventories and expenses. Mr. Loeb noted that Caldor installed electronic point-of-sale registers in all its stores early in the 1970's. Using them, Mr. Bennett said, ''buyers every Monday morning have on their desks reports on the merchandise that was sold in their departments as of the previous Saturday night,'' including information on colors and sizes, and can immediately order new supplies of fast-moving items.
 
 Supplementing these systems are physical inventories taken twice a year in all the stores, an unusual practice in an industry where annual inventories are the norm.
 
 ''They have very tight inventories and achieve high inventory turns,'' Mr. Loeb said. At the end of the third quarter, inventories were $145 million, a relatively small increase from $128 million at the same time in 1979, when the company had nine fewer stores, he said. He called Caldor's four inventory turns a year ''slightly better than other discounters.''
 
 Mr. Bennett said that the company's geographic concentration made it much easier to create and maintain such controls. ''The strength is that we're a regional chain,'' he said. 'Record Year' Expected
 
 Smart merchandising has also paid. Sales reached $562.8 million last year, almost three times the $195.4 million recorded in 1975, and net earnings quadrupled, to $19.7 million. For the year ending in January, Mr. Bennett predicted sales ''in excess of $650 million'' and ''another record year'' in earnings.
 
 Much of those gains reflect the increase in stores - almost double the 32 operating in 1975 - but Caldor has achieved strong sales gains as well. This year, sales are increasing at a rate of about 6 percent.
 
 With expansion, Caldor's return on equity, which dropped to 16.3 percent in 1975, has risen to the 25 percent range, a figure characterized by an analyst as twice the industry average and indicative of aggressive cost control. The company's modest corporate offices, for example, have been shoe-horned into an abandoned tire factory, and its ''shrinkage rate,'' losses due to theft and defects, is reportedly under 3 percent of sales, reflecting effective security programs.
 
 For the future, Caldor is exploring two methods of increasing sales and margins. To reinforce its large program of print advertising, which includes 30 full-color Sunday newspaper inserts a year, ''we are budgeting for television in 1981,'' Mr. Bennett said. Soft Goods Stressed
 
 To improve margins, Caldor is continuing its program to increase sales of soft goods, such as clothing and accessories, and is moving away from hard goods, such as appliances and cameras. ''We were a hard-goods operation basically, and we're expanding our soft goods,'' Mr. Bennett said.
 
 He said that the company was trying to shift the mix of 30 percent soft goods and 70 percent hard goods to a 40-60 ratio.  Caldor's geographic expansion involves more risks. ''Our plan - we're committed in people and money - is eight to 10 stores a year,'' Mr. Bennett said. These moves will take Caldor into New Jersey next year with three or four stores, including sites abandoned by Korvettes, he said.
 
 In 1982, he said, Caldor will continue its building in upstate New York and Massachusetts, and will add Pennsylvania outlets. It will also add a second New Hampshire store, and will grow from one store, just opened, in Rhode Island, to four. In 1983, he said, Caldor will ''probably'' enter the Washington, D.C., and Virginia markets.
 
 Caldor's character could change as its territory grows. As Alan M.  Silverman, senior vice president of research for John Muir & Company, said, ''Sometimes you stub your toe.''
 
 Another analyst, who asked not to be identified, said the company was ''tempting fate by venturing into what are not New England markets.'' He said that New Jersey and Pennsylvania, particularly, presented more competitive retailing environments and less robust economic conditions than those Caldor had faced.
 
 Mr. Bennett professes not to be bothered by this. ''We're used to competition,'' he said.


RETAILERS (91%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); RETAIL SALES (90%); DISCOUNT & CLUB STORES (90%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (90%); MIDDLE INCOME PERSONS (89%); UPPER INCOME PERSONS (78%); AFFLUENT MARKET (78%); ECONOMIC DECLINE (78%); RETAIL MERCHANDISE MANAGEMENT (78%); SALES FIGURES (78%); BUDGETS (78%); DEPARTMENT STORES (78%); COMPANY PROFITS (77%); TRENDS (77%); INTEREST RATES (73%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (73%); CHILDREN'S CLOTHING STORES (73%); CHRISTMAS (71%); CHILDREN'S CLOTHING (64%); WRITERS (61%); POINT OF SALE SYSTEMS (50%); 
