3S8G-CH30-000B-Y22K


The New York Times


News Summary;WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 10, 1980


19801210T000000Z


InternationalAn American contingency plan has been prepared by Washington for possible use if Soviet forces intervene in Poland, according to Administration officials. They said that a number of economic and political steps had been discussed at length by President Carter and Secretary of State Muskie and that Mr. Muskie was taking the proposals to NATO's winter meeting in Brussels to obtain allied agreement on them. (Page A1, Column 6.)NATO will gain surveillance aircraft from the United States this week to counter the possibility of a surprise attack on Western Europe arising from any Soviet intervention in Poland, NATO sources said.  (A11:1.)
 
 Restiveness among Poland's farmers may raise new problems for the Government at a time of food shortages. Leaders of a new movement t hat says it represents 500,000 of the countr y's 3.5 million private farmers called for a national meeting on Sund ay to chart a protest togain recognition as a union. But the leadersh ip of the national unionmovement is unlikely to endorse a strike call because of concern about Soviet intervention. (A1:5.)An American envoy reacted angrily to disclosures about human rights policy recommended by a transition team of President-elect Ronald Reagan. Robert E. White, the Ambasssador to El Salvador, charged that the proposals were undercutting his ability to influence moderates and were encouraging rightists in organizing a coup. (A1:6.)Charles H. Percy was criticized for reportedly suggesting that the creation of a Palestinian state could help resolve the Arab-Israeli dispute. The criticism was expressed on the Senate floor by Bob Packwood. Both Senators are Republicans. (A4:3-4.)EnergySharply higher heating oil prices are expected by industry analysts.  They said that the prices, which have risen 6 cents a gallon in the last few months, might increase as much as 20 cents in the next three months. The increases, occurring at a time of ample supplies, were attributed to higher crude oil prices, colder-than-usual weather and rising refining costs. (A1:1-2.)NationalThe revenue-sharing program would be extended for three years under legislation approved overwhelmingly in the Senate. The bill would provide municipalities with $4.6 billion annually but allot funds to the states only in the latter two fiscal years. It is uncertain whether differences between the Senate bill and a version already passed in the House can be reconciled before Congress adjourns.  (A1:1.)The double jeopardy shield was limited by the Supreme Court. In a 5-to-4 decision the Justices ruled that the constitutional protection does not bar a prosecutor from appealing a sentence it views as too lenient. For more than a century, the High Court has interpreted the protection against double jeopardy to bar both a second prosecution after an acquittal and a second punishment for a single offense.  (A1:2.)Disclosures about Abscam inquiries may lead to penalties. The Justice Department has notified several employees that they face possible disciplinary action for improperly releasing information about undercover investigations of political corruption. The penalties could range from a reprimand to dismissal. (A25:1.)A new Abscam trial began in Washington. A Federal prosecutor told the jurors that they would see a videotape in which Representative Richard Kelly, Republican of Florida, agreed to sell favors, accepted a bribe of $25,000 and stuffed the cash into his pockets. Mr. Kelly is the fifth Representative to be tried on charges arising from the F.B.I.'s investigation of political corruption. The four others, all Democrats, were convicted. (A14:1.)Alexander M. Haig can be confirmed if he is nominated for Secretary of State, in the view of Howard H. Baker Jr., the new Republican majority leader in the Senate. Doubts about the confirmation have been raised in the context of General Haig's role in the Watergate scandals. (D22:1-3.)A revival of Boston's theater district costing $500 million is being pressed after decades of decline. Major structures are being restored and what is now largely a wasteland is being revitalized by luxury ho tels, offic e buildings, department stores and a transportation center sprink led with shops and restaurants. (A14:2-5.)MetropolitanJohn Lennon was mourned by millions of Beatle fans and public figures around the world. Outside the Dakota on Manhattan's Central Park West where the musician had lived there was an unending crowd of mourners who left flowers and sang the famed Beatle songs that epitomized to many the turbulence and hopes of the 1960's. Mark David Chapman, the 25-year-old former mental patient charged with the fatal shooting, was confined for psychiatric examination. (A1:3-4.)A major gift to the Metropolitan Museum of Art has been bequeathed by a leading Chicago collector, Muriel Kallis Steinberg Newman. The art collection is valued at $12 million to $15 million and is rich in paintings of the Abstract Expressionist school. The entire collection will be exhibited at the museum next May. (A1:3-5.)Structural flaws in 637 new buses prompted the New York City Transit Authority to order an immediate halt in delivery of the 200 other buses covered in a contract with the Grumman-Flxible Corporation.  (B1:6.)
 
 Business Digest, Page D1


NEWS BRIEFS (90%); ECONOMIC POLICY (89%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); OIL & GAS PRICES (86%); APPEALS (83%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); PUBLIC FINANCE (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (73%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (71%); HEATING OIL (68%); HEATING OIL PRICES (68%); CRUDE OIL PRICES (67%); HEATING OIL MARKETS (63%); SUPREME COURTS (62%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (62%); DOUBLE JEOPARDY (62%); CRUDE OIL MARKETS (62%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (62%); FOOD CRISES & SHORTAGES (54%); HUMAN RIGHTS (51%); 
