3S8G-CGX0-000B-Y1JP


The New York Times


RATES CUT FOR SMALL BUSINESSES


19801212T000000Z


In an effort to ease the severe financial strain on the smallest businesses, the Chemical Bank announced yesterday that it had begun providing them with cut-rate loans.
 
 Under the program, businesses can borrow up to $100,000 from Chemical at a rate of approximately 15 1/2 percent. The prime rate, which banks charge on loans to their biggest and most creditworthy customers, rose to 20 percent on Wednesday.
 
 As a result of the current extraordinarily high level of interest rates, many small businesses are in danger of failing.  ''Smaller businesses are particularly vulnerable to high interest rates because often they are less able to pass these costs on to their customers,'' said Richard D. Hill, chairman of the First National Bank of Boston, which has been offering a special rate to small businesses in the New England area.
 
 Dollar Volume Not Great
 
 Robert I. Lipp, senior executive vice president of Chemical, said thousands of the bank's customers would be eligible for the program.  The total dollar volume of credits under the program, however, would not be great because of the small size of the individual loans, he added. The bank had introduced a similar program last April, when the prime rate rose to 20 percent for the first time.
 
 William S. Ogden, vice chairman of the Chase Manhattan Bank, which in the past has had special lending rates for small businesses, said yesterday that his bank was ''actively considering'' re-establishing the program.
 
 Citibank said that it was not planning to introduce a special rate for small businesses. ''We scale our rates according to risk,'' a spokesman added.
 
 The Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company put a special rate for small businesses into effect exactly two years ago today. A spokesman said that at present ''more than 2,000 companies are borrowing'' under the program. The bank has not publicized the program since it was instituted, however.
 
 A number of other banks elsewhere around the country have similar programs. Among them are the First National Bank of Boston and the Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh.
 
 Each bank's program is somewhat different. At Chemical, companies can borrow up to $100,000 for working capital purposes, and their total loans, not including mortgages, may not exceed $250,000. A Point Above Discount Rate
 
 Chemical's base rate for small businesses is set at one percentage point above the discount rate charged by the Federal Reserve System on loans to financial institutions. The discount rate, whi ch was raised by one percentage point on Dec. 4, now is 13 percent.
 
 But, in addition to the discount rate plus one percentage point, Chemical also will charge a ''normal credit spread.'' This normal credit spread, according to Mr. Lipp, is what the bank charges above a base rate, usually the prime rate, to a particular customer. The spread depends mainly on a borrower's credit rating.
 
 Thus, a small company that ordinarily borrowed at one and a half percentage points above the prime, which Mr. Lipp said was the average, would be able to borrow up to $100,000 from Chemical at 15 1/2 percent. This would be the 13 percent discount rate, plus the one percentage point premium for the small business base rate, plus the normal spread. Eliminated by 12 Percent Prime
 
 If Chemical had continued to use the prime as its base, a small business with a normal credit spread of one and a half percentage points would have to pay 21 1/2 percent for its loans. The special rate for small businesses would automatically be eliminated once the prime rate drops to 12 percent.
 
 Manufacturers Hanover sets its base rate for small businesses at one and a quarter percentage points below the prime rate. Yesterday the base rate stood at 18 3/4 percent.
 
 Although its base rate is higher than Chemical's, Manufacturers Hanover has set higher limits on the amount that may be borrowed. It also said it was willing to lend at the lower rate to new customers.  To be eligible, a company's assets may not exceed $1.5 million. The most they may borrow is $500,000.


INTEREST RATES (91%); ECONOMIC NEWS (91%); SMALL BUSINESS (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (89%); PRIME RATES (89%); CHEMICALS (78%); CHEMICALS MFG (78%); THIS DAY IN HISTORY (78%); CENTRAL BANKS (78%); EXECUTIVES (68%); WORKING CAPITAL (50%); 
