3S8G-CJ40-000B-Y506


The New York Times


ECONOMIC INDEX FOR OCTOBER UP 0.9%, SMALLEST GAIN IN 4 MONTHS


19801202T000000Z


The Commerce Department reported today that its principal barometer of economic trends registered a decidedly smaller gain in October than in any of the three preceding months.
 
 Several private forecasters said the slower rise in the department's index of leading economic indicators showed that the recent run-up of interest rates was braking what started out as a brisk recovery from last spring's short, steep business recession.
 
 The index, which is supposed to signal where the economy is headed, rose by nine-tenths of 1 percent in October, a much smaller gain than the increases of
 
 Rising interest rates caused the stock market to plunge by 23.89 points, its biggest drop in more than a year. New six-month Treasury bills were sold at a 14.55 percent interest ra te, the highest since April 3. Pages D1 and D12.3.6 percent in July, 2.1 percent in August and 3.1 percent in September. The September figure was revised upward from a preliminary reading of 2.4 percent.
 
 Seven of the components of the index showed gains and three posted losses. The three were building permits for new housing, industrial investment and growth of the money supply after allowing for inflation. Of the three, the largest was a drop of 15 percent in building permits, which are a clue to future construction activity.
 
 The Commerce Department said the forces causing the index to chalk up the October gain were a slightly longer workweek, a decline in layoffs, a slowdown in factory deliveries (indicating a pile-up of orders), a rise in liquid assets, an increase in prices of sensitive raw materials, higher prices for common stocks and a rise in new orders.  Although the index of leading indicators is far from a perfect forecasting guide, it has more or less pointed to turns in the business cycle. For October, the index stood at 136.3, compared with the revised September reading of 135.1. The index is based on 1967, taken as 100.
 
 Data for two other components of the index, inventory changes and net business formation, will become available later and could cause revision of the preliminary index number released today.
 
 In a comment echoed by other analysts, Patricia Mosser of Data Resources Inc., a Lexington, Mass., forecasting concern, said that ''housing and investment are big-ticket things that are related to interest rates.''
 
 Summarizing the latest Data Resources forecast, Miss Mosser said that ''the economy will at best slow down and at worst we'll see a double-dip co me the first of this year.''
 
 Another forecaster, Washington-based Michael K. Evans, predicted weaker growth in the first half of 1981. ''Virtually all creditsensitive sectors of the economy are affected,'' he told clients in a newsletter. However, Mr. Evans also said that ''interest rates have peaked,'' that short-term rates would fall three to four percentage points by March and that ''the economy is expected to regain its old bounce in the latter half of 1981.''
 
 Alan Greenspan, the New York forecaster who advised President Gerald R. Ford and is mentioned as a possible Secretary of the Treasury for President-elect Ronald Reagan, said that ''it's hard to make a case for anything going up from here.'' Dissipation of Gains Forecast
 
 Citing interest rates, Mr. Greenspan's concern, Townsend-Greenspan & Company, told its clients that it was unlikely that the thirdquarter upswing could be sustained. ''With interest rates now cutting off final demand'' in housing and cars, Townsend-Greenspan said, ''it appears more likely that the production gains will dissipate than that consumption will rise.''
 
 Mr. Evans told his clients that ''our forecast for 1981 is now slightly more bearish because of the continuing rise in interest rates.'' He revised his forecast of growth in 1981 to 1.9 percent from an earlier figure of 2.4 percent.
 
 Mr. Evans revised his forecast of the Consumer Price Index's rise for 1981 to 11.7 percent from 11.3 percent, mainly because of higher home loan interest rates. Data Resources forecast an 11 percent surge in the index in 1981 and a fourth-quarter 1980 rise at an annual rate of 12.9 percent.
 
 Miss Mosser of Data Resources, stating that a slip in overall economic activity was possible but not probable early in 1981, said that ''we're more pessimistic now about the first quarter because of Fed tightening.'' She was referring to the squeeze on bank credit by the Federal Reserve System, which has been trying to prevent the growth of the money supply from exceeding its desired rate.


ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); CONSTRUCTION (90%); TRENDS (90%); COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS (90%); ECONOMIC INDICATORS (90%); INTEREST RATES (89%); INDEX OF LEADING ECONOMIC INDICATORS (89%); COMMON STOCK (78%); REAL ESTATE (78%); NEW ORDERS (78%); FACTORY ORDERS (78%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (78%); RECESSION (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); PRICE INCREASES (77%); BUSINESS CLIMATE & CONDITIONS (77%); TREASURY SECURITIES (73%); WORK WEEK (72%); MONEY SUPPLY (72%); LAYOFFS (71%); BUILDING PERMITS (71%); COMPANY LOSSES (71%); 
