3S8G-CF70-000B-Y27P


The New York Times


HIGHER G.N.P. GROWTH INDICATED BY NEW DATA


19801224T000000Z


The American economy grew much faster from July through September than previously believed, fresh Government figures indicated today, and the pace of recovery seems to have speeded up further in the current quarter.
 
 According to the Commerce Department, the nation's gross national product - its total output of goods and services, adjusted for inflation - climbed at an annual rate of 2.4 percent in the third quarter. This was far above the yearly gain of nine-tenths of 1 percent that had been previously reported.
 
 Economists advised caution in interpreting the numbers, however, since they were presented as part of a comprehensive revision of the data, only the seventh since World War II.
 
 The G.N.P. gain was attributed mainly to what economists call final sales, which rose at a 4.1 percent annual rate. The high level of final sales meant that goods were not piling up in warehouses.  Swollen inventories eventually lead to cutbacks in production.
 
 Treasury Secretary G. William Miller said Friday in a farewell session with reporters that G.N.P. growth in the fourth quarter could be at an annual rate of 4 to 5 percent. His office said today this projection was made without reference to the higher thirdquarter results, which he had not seen.
 
 Courtenay M. Slater, the Commerce Department's chief economist, said today that preliminary evidence showed a fourth-quarter gain of ''a little'' under 4 percent.
 
 One of the components of the G.N.P. calculations struck Commerce Department and private economists as particularly surprising and important. This showed that Americans had saved as much as 20 percent more of their incomes over the last decade than had been thought. 6.2% of Disposable Income
 
 Personal savings as a percentage of disposable income were put at 6.2 percent in the third quarter, up from the previously reported 4.9 percent, and the department said savings apparently had been similarly understated throughout most of the 1970's, based on Internal Revenue Service audits.
 
 Michael K. Evans, of Evans Economics Inc. in Washington, noted that he and many others had long bemoaned the low rate of American savings, which had been cited as a major reason as to why the nation's economic performance had been surpassed by some foreign competitors. ''It turns out that it wasn't down nearly as much as we had expected,'' Mr. Evans said.
 
 This finding was said to have major implications for the tax legislation that will be taken up by the new Congress. More Difficult to Pass
 
 Many expect President-elect Ronald Reagan to press ahead with his controversial plan to cut personal income taxes, but it seemed likely that some measures designed specifically to encourage capital formation might now be more difficult to pass.
 
 One proposal would have been to raise to $2,500 from $1,500 the annual amount individuals could contribute tax-free to their individual retirement accounts and to increase the number of people covered.
 
 Another idea is to ''decouple'' savings and dividend income from ordinary income and tax them at the lowest rates in the tax table.  The revised savings data may be a setback for those backing these capital-formation measures. Since the Commerce Department said that one of the main sources of its information on savings was audits by the Internal Revenue Service, it appeared that the audits had uncovered substantial under-reporting of interest and dividend income by taxpayers.
 
 The G.N.P. revisions, calculated in detail back to 1968, did show that the annual real G.N.P. growth was three-tenths of a point higher for the whole 1969-79 period than was shown by previously published estimates. Peaks and Troughs Unchanged
 
 Recent business contractions are now shown to have been less severe while recent expansions have been somewhat stronger than had been reported. Neither the peak nor trough of any business cycle, however, has been changed.
 
 In one exception, the sharply recessionary second quarter of 1980 is shown to have suffered a rate of decline of 9.9 percent instead of the previously reported 9.6. The first-quarter gain was at a 3.1 percent rate instead of 1.2 percent while the fourth-quarter gain of 1979 was revised downward to six-tenths of 1 percent from 2 percent.
 
 For the years 1974 and 1975, which included the preceding recession, the total decline was 1.7 percent instead of the 2.7 percent that had been reported.
 
 Besides the understated savings rate, another key component in which there was a major change was in international transactions. All reinvested earnings of Anerican companies are now counted instead of only those that are repatriated. As a result $15.1 billion was added to the total for 1979, the department said.


STATISTICS (90%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (90%); COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS (90%); DISPOSABLE INCOME (86%); TAX LAW (85%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (78%); SAVINGS RATES (78%); GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT (78%); MANUFACTURING OUTPUT (77%); TAX AUTHORITIES (77%); ECONOMIC INDICATORS (77%); TAXES & TAXATION (69%); PERSONAL & FAMILY INCOME (68%); PERSONAL FINANCE (68%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (67%); LEGISLATION (63%); INCOME TAX (61%); TAX AUDITS (61%); WORLD WAR II (54%); 
