3S8G-CJB0-000B-Y07Y


The New York Times


CREDIT MARKETS;INFLATION HOPES VS. RATE CLIMB


19801201T000000Z


The bond markets were recently described by one senior government securities dealer as ''a daily tug of war,'' with rising short-term interest rates on one side and hopes for a less inflationary future on the other.
 
 The short-term interest rates are making some investors wary of buying long-term bonds. At the same time, however, enough people are buying up the scant supply of new bond issues that long-term interest rates have not been rising. They are apparently confident that the future will bring less inflation.
 
 In the Treasury market, rising short-term interest rates can be shown by six-month Treasury bills, which had increased to 14 1/4 percent at last Friday's trading, from 13.27 percent in the Nov. 3 auction. The new 12 3/4 percent Treasury bonds due 2010, in contrast, yielded about 12.3 percent last Friday, compared with 12.81 percent when they were sold Nov. 7. Rates May Rise
 
 When the credit markets ended trading last week, many analysts predicted that short-term interest rates would rise further and perhaps cause long-term bond yields to increase in the near future.  At the same time, many observers say, the rise in long-term yields would be only temporary. The rising short-term rates, it is claimed, would cause the economy to lapse into renewed recession, which would in turn result in lower interest rates.
 
 That view was summarized by economists at the Chase Manhattan Bank, who said that ''near-term prospects suggest'' rising inte rest rates ''for s ome time,'' but that ''from a longer-term viewpoint, present bond yield levels offer a significant buying opportunity.''
 
 According to Salomon Brothers, in the Nov. 28 issue of Comments on Credit, the nation's money supply has grown so much more rapidly than desired that ''it will continue to take substantial money market pressure for the Fed to come even close'' to achieving the money supply goals it described to Congress last February.
 
 So far, the M-1B measure of money supply has grown at a 7.4 percent rate this year, well above the 6 1/2 percent maximum sought by the Federal Reserve. The Fed's difficulties in controlling M-1B, consisting of currency plus checking and check-like accounts at banks and savings instituttions, will not be eliminated even if the next few weeks show declines in M-1B, Salomon Brothers said, since December has been a month of substantial increases in recent years.
 
 The investment banking firm concluded that ''further increases in open market rates, as well as in the discount rate, cannot be ruled out.'' Other observers suggested that the Fed might increase the two-percentage-point surcharge it now imposes on large banks that borrow money frequently from the Fed at the discount window.
 
 Bond traders explain that their market could still be buffeted by the increases predicted for the short-term market. Dealers cannot afford to carry an inventory of bonds yielding 12 percent to 15 percent, if their financing cost is 18 percent and rising. When that happens, firms become unwilling bidders for bonds offered for sale, trading becomes chaotic and yields rise to levels that later are recognized as far too high compared with inflation. Somewhat Insulated
 
 So far, the long-term market has been somewhat insulated by the rising level of long-term rates, since dealers have been able to arrange financings at rates well under 16 percent. However, they fear that further increases in the Federal funds rate, and a heavy supply of new Treasury secur ities, threaten to strip away that insulation and cause long-term rates to move upward, per haps briefly.
 
 Late last week, the Federal funds rate showed disturbing signs of possibly rising above the 17.43 percent rate of the week ended Nov.  26. On Friday, for example, loans among banks and others in the Federal funds market opened at 18 1/4 percent and briefly rose to 20 percent, despite a temporary move by the Fed to supply reserves to the banking system.
 
 Analysts are not certain if the 18 and 19 percent rates were an accurate description of the banking system's demands for credit, or just an abnormality caused by the Thanksgiving holiday or another technical factor. This week they will scrutinize the funds rate and try to predict future moves in short-term interest rates.


ECONOMIC NEWS (92%); INTEREST RATES (92%); BONDS (92%); BOND MARKETS (91%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (90%); GOVERNMENT BONDS (90%); TREASURY SECURITIES (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (89%); MONEY SUPPLY (89%); NEW ISSUES (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (85%); BOND ISSUES (78%); INVESTMENT BANKING (78%); RECESSION (77%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (75%); 
