3S8G-CJ40-000B-Y4XD


The New York Times


Most Stocks Drop, But Dow Adds 4.95


19801203T000000Z


Another jump in the prime lending rate, now approaching the 20 percent peak of last April, sent stock prices generally lower yesterday. A number of major banks raised their prime rates to 18 1/2 percent from 17 3/4 percent.
 
 However, a final-hour rally led by selected computer and energy issues produced a modest gain in the Dow Jones industrial average.  After showing a loss of nearly 10 points at 1 P.M. in response to the latest increase in the prime rate, the Dow finished at 974.40, up 4.95 points. Among the Dow components, International Business Machines rose 1 3/8, to 67 7/8.
 
 Texaco, the volume leader on a turnover exceeding one million shares, rose 3/4, to 51 1/8. This compared with its day's low at 48 5/8. Texaco, which traded early Monday at a record price of 54 3/8, said yesterday that it was stepping up plans to withdraw from gasoline marketing in several states, G.M., Kodak, U.S. Steel Rise
 
 General Motors, also on the active list, added 3/4, to 43 1/4.  Eastman Kodak and United States Steel each advanced more than a point.
 
 Hammered by rising interest rates, the Dow industrials plummeted 23.89 points on Monday, the average's largest single-day setback in more than a year.
 
 Brokers on block-trading desks in Wall Street said that yesterday's rebound in some major stocks essentially reflected a drying up of sell orders by institutional investors and market professionals on the heels of Monday's plunge.
 
 Volume expanded to 52.3 million shares from the previous session's 48.2 million. Other Market Averages Lo wer
 
 While the Dow industrials managed to advance, other major market averages moved lower. This included the New York Stock Exchange's composite index and the Dow transportation average. The American Stock Exchange's market value index also declined.
 
 Over all, declining issues outnumbered advancing stocks by almost 2 to 1 on the Big Board. At the market's low point yesterday, declines outpaced advances by nearly 4 to 1.
 
 Honeywell climbed 4 points, to 101 1/2, after the company announced that it was entering the ''super-mini'' computer system market. Daniel Industries Down 8 3/4
 
 Daniel Industries tumbled 8 3/4 points, to 53, after reporting fiscal fourth-quarter profits of 69 cents a share, compared with 61 cents a year earlier. The price of the stock of Daniel, which produces systems that measure the flow of oil and natural gas, has quintupled within the last year.
 
 Yesterday's increase in the prime rate marked the seventh uptick in less than a month. The prime is the most visible of all short-term rates and it reflects the rising costs of funds that the banks must pay for money they lend out. On Nov. 5, the prime stood at 14 1/2 percent and its meteoric rise within four weeks, perhaps more than any other factor, has eroded the confidence of many investors and encouraged profit taking in stocks.
 
 The prime rate customarily is the interest rate banks charge their blue-ribbon corporate clients, but rates also are rising on the consumer loan front. On Monday, three major New York banks raised the interest rates they charge on consumer installment loans, such as automobile loans, by as much as six percentage points. These rates, now ranging from 17 to 19 percent, resulted from a new state law that eliminated usury ceilings on such loans. Rate Forecasts Called Difficult
 
 Looking ahead, many economists believe it is difficult to forecast with any accuracy the peak - and timing - for rising rates. ''The 'magic' level of rates that will turn off the economy and the demand for money is still unknown,'' commented Alan C. Lerner of the Bankers Trust Company.
 
 In Washington, Treasury Secretary G. William Miller said that ''interest rates will stay relatively high until there is a change in inflationary expectations.''
 
 One effect of the recent steady rise in interest rates is to place a number of utility preferred stocks on the list of new lows for the last year. These issues, brokers explained, must compete with climbing yields available on fixed-income securities.


PRIME RATES (91%); INTEREST RATES (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); STOCK INDEXES (90%); MANUFACTURING OUTPUT (89%); STOCK EXCHANGES (89%); NATURAL GAS (78%); COMPUTER EQUIPMENT (77%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (77%); INTERIM FINANCIAL RESULTS (76%); ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (76%); IRON & STEEL MILLS (72%); COMPANY PROFITS (63%); 
