3S8G-CGC0-000B-Y07T


The New York Times


CREDIT MARKETS;ALL EYES ON FED'S POLICY PANEL


19801215T000000Z


Attention in the credit markets is focused this week on the Tuesday meeting of the Federal Reserve Open Market Committee, which sets monetary policy and can direct short-term interest rates up or down.
 
 Even though short-term rates should continue to rise because of heavy demands for credit by business, some analysts say that the Federal Reserve will decide at the coming meeting to stop pus hing those rates u p. They think that, after helping i nterest ra tes increase about 10 percentage points since summer, the Fede ral Reservehas set the stage for an economic contraction which will c ause less money supply growth and lower inflation - two of the Fed's primary goals.
 
 Others, however, do not agree with this prediction and claim that the Fed could easily decide to push rates up still more.  Higher interest rates, said Philip Braverman, an economist at the Chase Manhattan Bank, ''should be almost a foregone conclusion'' since the Fed ''will not hesitate to take further tightening measures.'' Mr. Braverman said that the high rates already in place are setting the stage for ''an eventual recession.''
 
 Those expecting no further tightening by the Fed were encouraged late Friday when it was announced that the nation's money supply had declined modestly. That decline should lead to a ''temporary plateau'' in rates, said Maury Harris, an economist at Paine Webber Inc., who added that the Federal Reserve was likely to pause before deciding to push rates still higher. Prime Rate Another Matter
 
 Even if the Federal Reserve does not push short-term rates higher, analysts think that the bank prime lending rate might still increase above 20 percent, as banks catch up with other rate increases. A lag between money market rates and the prime would be similar to last April, when the prime rate did not reach 20 percent until after other interest rates were declining from their highest levels.
 
 Heavy borrowing by businesses should also put upward pressure on short-term rates. Economists at Bankers Trust calculated that, after seasonal adjustments, bank loans to businesses over the last three months have grown at about a 30 percent annual rate. Business borrowings in the commercial paper market are also heavy, increasing by $1.8 billion in the week ended Dec. 3.
 
 The future levels of long bond yields are harder to predict because few corporations are borrowing long-term and few investors are commiting funds to that market. Securities dealers say that huge price swings in the bond market do not reflect activity by real investors.
 
 Bond prices rose two points Friday, in a dramatic reversal of Thursday's losses. ''These price quotes mean absolutely nothing,'' said Richard Dunham, president of Merrill Lynch Government Securities Inc., who said that the gains showed only that prices are erratic at a time when investors do not want to buy bonds and when high shortterm interest rates keep many traders and speculators out of the market.
 
 According to many securities dealers, the financial futures markets have helped cause volatile bond prices but have also protected them against losses caused by the price swings. They readily acknowledge that the ability to hedge in bill, note and bond futures have helped many firms avoid steep losses, even though securiites prices were declining. Some Complain
 
 However, some cash market participants complain that the bond futures markets have made cash market prices more erratic. Bond futures prices can increase for no reason other than that some traders on the floor of the exchange ''might be hedging their losses in grain contracts'' Mr. Dunham observed.
 
 While steep bond market losses on some recent days spawned jokes about bonds being the equivalent of expensive wallpaper, major securities dealers insist that reports of the bond markets' death are just as premature now as they were last February and March when interest rates were rising rapidly and the markets were chaotic.
 
 ''The market is not functioning too badly,'' stated James Toffey, managing director at the First Boston Corportion. Mr. Toffey said that conditions were too unsettled for new bond issues right now but that he thought it would not take much of a bond market rally to attract many borrowers.
 
 If Treasury bonds stabilized at 12 1/2 percent, he estimated, ''some issuers would take a look.'' Other investment bankers agree that many companies who deferred borrowings because of high interest rates this autumn would now be willing to pay rates higher than those they rejected earlier. The sharp rise in rates, from about 9 1/2 percent for Treasury bonds in June to over 13 percent Thursday and 12.88 percent late Friday, has changed their perceptions of just what is a high interest rate.


US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); BANKING & FINANCE (91%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); ECONOMIC POLICY (90%); INTEREST RATES (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); MONEY SUPPLY (90%); MONETARY POLICY (90%); PUBLIC FINANCE (90%); BOND MARKETS (89%); PRIME RATES (89%); BONDS (89%); INFLATION (78%); PRICE INCREASES (77%); RECESSION (77%); COMMERCIAL PAPER (77%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (76%); BUSINESS FORECASTS (76%); PRICE CHANGES (75%); GOVERNMENT BONDS (63%); COMMERCIAL LENDING (63%); 
