3S8G-CGP0-000B-Y0XK


The New York Times


CONNECTICUT HOUSING;SLOWDOWN IN CONDOMINIUM SALES


19801214T000000Z


DESPITE a housing shortage and the demand for shelter, a substantial number of Connecticut condominium developers are facing serious financial difficulties.
 
 A year of sky-high interest rates has effectively disqualified so many buyers for so long that partly developed sites are being put up for sale or construction schedules delayed while developers seek private sources of mortgage financing for their buyers or wait for interest rates to drop.
 
 Many of these projects were conceived at the height of the lowinterest period of 1978 and early 1979. Now, said John Scott of Scott, Fitton & Company, New Haven condominium consultants, buyers who had taken options no longer qualify for the necessary mortgages, and sales contracts are falling through. In other situations buyers admit to a psychological resistance to paying such high rates of interest even though their income is judged by the bank to be sufficient to make the higher mortgage payments.
 
 ''I am really desperate,'' admitted one condominium developer, also from the New Haven area, who, fearing his creditors might discover his cash-flow crisis, asked that his name not be used.
 
 This developer is looking for a purchaser for all three of his current projects - a total of 400 would-be condominium homes in various stages of completion. ''But who is going to pick up the project at a fair market value when they know they won't be able to sell any of the individual units because of interest rates?'' he asked.
 
 As of this writing, there were 12 such ready-to-go or partly completed Connecticut condominium projects whose owners are looking for other developers to take them over, , according to James Lombard, a condominium broker in Branford who deals both with buyers inside the industry as well as selling condominiums at retail.
 
 Representing a total of 1,564 potential condominium homes, the largest parcel is a 530-unit waterfront development in East Haven.  The smallest is a 26-unit project in Middlefield. The list also covers condominium sites in Danbury, Cromwell, New Britain, Guilford, Branford, Kent and Cheshire. ''And they're just sitting there,'' said Mr. Lombard gloomily.
 
 He found that developments planned with a middle-income price of $70,000 to $100,000 were the hardest to sell. Conversions or new construction that could be offered around $50,000 or less or as luxur y homes were still popular.
 
 The reason, explained Mr. Lombard, is that low-income buyers can qualify for subsidized loans such as F.H.A. or Connecticut Housing Finance Authority mortgages. At the luxury end, he said, many buyers can pay cash, often with the proceeds from the sale of existing homes.
 
 For everyone else it is a time of disappointment and frustration.  ''We have had to call buyers as late as two weeks before a closing to tell them that they no longer qualify because interest rates just went up another point,'' said Nolan Kerschner, a Norwalk condominium developer. ''People are being knocked off right and left.''
 
 As a result many developers are being forced to curtail plans, fearing they will be caught in an untenable financial position. For instance, John Severino, an Essex builder and developer, has now indefinitely delayed two projects - an 84-unit complex in Guilford and a 70-unit condominium in Branford. ''I can't afford to have my units just sit there,'' he said.
 
 Russell Waldo, a Guilford developer, has also delayed two projects - a total of 126 units. ''We are treading water because we are having a great deal of difficulty moving our product on account of high interest rates,'' he said.
 
 What they say they find especially irritating is watching prospective buyers being turned down by the banks. The demand, they insist, is phenomenal. ''The traffic on weekends is unbelievable,'' said Arthur Collins, a Greenwich developer. ''There's barely standing room in our sales office at Palmer Point.'' Nevertheless, Mr. Collins has not been able to sell the remaining 15 units at the development.  He says that as soon as purchasers start looking into the cost of financing and appreciate just what interest rates have done to carrying costs they run away. ''There is a terrific fallout,'' he said. Another factor slowing sales, Mr. Collins said, is the loss of the investment purchaser - always a substantial section of the condominium market. High interest rates have now made it uneconomical for an investor to buy, said Mr. Collins, because the prevailing market rents no longer cover carrying costs.
 
 As a result, many condominium developers are seeki ng alternative solutions. David Kagan, a Hartford area devel oper, is renting unsold units for the time being. Others such as Nola n Kerschner are offering subsidies. Even Mr. Kerschner pays t he point charge - the initial fee charged by banks processing a mor tgage - or he agrees to pay an interest rate differential for a perio d of a year or so to buyers who qualify but who are discouraged by the thought of paying so much for their money. This means that the buyer temporarily assumes a lower loan rate, depending upon the individual agreement, in the hope that during the grace period nego tiated, interest rates will fall.
 
 Even so, developers agree that these are merely stopgap measures.  What is really needed to keep them financially afloat, they insist, is a bypass method that shields them from the gyrations of the conventional mortgage market while these long-term projects go forward. No bank right now, they find, will guarantee a mortgage interest rate for any appreciable length of time. So even trying to tie up bulk mortgage money in advance does not work.
 
 Mr. Waldo, for instance, is talking with overseas investors interested in offering a pool of standard, 30-year mortgage loans at 12 percent interest. Mr. Kerschner is trying to create another private investment pool that will write mortgages at a rate 3 or 4 points below the prevailing rate in exchange for a share in subsequent profits.
 
 Called ''equity sharing,'' it is one of the newest financial tools in real estate. What it effectively means is that when a buyer eventually sells his unit the mortgage holder takes back an agreed percentage of the profits as a trade-off for carrying the cheaper loan.
 
 Taking a totally different approach to the problem, Mr. Collins said that this was the best, not the worst, of times to start building. ''Always buy your straw hat in the fall,'' he said, explaining that he believes in timing a project to commence when money markets hit a cyclical peak in the assumption that these current cycles are of very limited duration. Therefore, by the time the units are completed the low point should have been reached.  Moreover, he added that ''because everyone else will have then fled the field competition for buyers will be much less.''
 
 Bankers, meanwhile, acknowledge that developers are facing serious cash-flow problems, but the bankers insist that in the long term there is every reason to have faith in condominiums as a good investment. ''Although we have been far more cautious in our construction lending at the moment,'' said David B. Harding, senior vice president of the Colonial Bank, one of the major mortgage construction lenders in the state, ''we still believe the market is out there.''
 
 So rather than turn away too many developers at a time when he said he knew there was a great demand for homes, he preferred to make sur ethat only a f ew units were put up at any one time. Until these are sold, he said , the next phase of the construction loan is withheld.
 
 Ellen Lawson, vice president of the Mortgage Department at the First Federal Savings and Loan of New Haven, is equally confident.  She said that prices would fade with the passing of proposed new regulations that would allow for such modifications as lengthening the term of the mortgage to 40 years instead of the current ceiling of 30. In addition, she said that the bank had also been looking into the possibility of equity sharing in exchange for lower interest rates. However, it was so new and radical an idea that she would not speculate as to whether that bank would participate.


RESIDENTIAL CO-OWNERSHIP (94%); CONDOMINIUMS (92%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (91%); REAL ESTATE (90%); INTEREST RATES (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); CONSTRUCTION (90%); REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENT (90%); RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION (90%); MORTGAGE BANKING & FINANCE (90%); RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUMS (89%); MORTGAGE LOANS (89%); HOUSING AUTHORITIES (73%); BANKING & FINANCE AGENCIES (73%); LOW INCOME PERSONS (68%); MIDDLE INCOME PERSONS (68%); EXISTING HOME SALES (60%); 
