3S8G-CFN0-000B-Y3BN


The New York Times


RUSH IS ON FOR U.S. FUNDS IN FINAL DAYS OF CARTER ERA


19801221T000000Z


With days running out on the Carter Administration, Government officials in the metropolitan area are racing to wrap up the paperwork on a variety of federally assisted housing and communitydevelopment construction projects.
 
 The fear is that matters near completion but still unsettled after January will run the risk of being left in limbo or scuttled by Republicans more concerned with pushing their own agenda than the one left over by the Democrats.
 
 In New York City these projects range from a proposed $93 million Federal building to be built in Jamaica, Queens, to nearly 5,000 lowincome housing units.
 
 In New Jersey, officials are awaiting approval from the Department of Housing and Urban Development on a request for construction and rehabilitation of 300 low-income housing units that fall under the Section 8 program. Under Section 8, the Government pays the required rent after the tenant contributes a fourth of his or her income.
 
 Joseph Santangelo, a spokesman for Governor Byrne, said additional applications were pending with H.U.D. for homesteading and rehabilitation in Newark and he cited plans for a five-story office building in Asbury Park.
 
 In Connecticut, Robert O'Connor, executive director for the state's Housing Finance Authority, said he was not overly concerned about the effects of a shift toward a more conservative philosophy in the new Administration.
 
 ''We are not expecting a drought after Jan. 20,'' he said, ''because we think the Reagan people will continue the current programs, maybe applying their own architectural touches here and there after a year or so.'' Mr. O'Connor said he would like to see H.U.D. quickly give its approval for new construction of 275 units of single-family ownership housing.
 
 Deputy Mayor Robert F. Wagner Jr. appears to feel much the same way. ''While it's true there may be philosophical differences between the Carter and Reagan people on the importance of some projects,'' he said, ''time delays may mean we will have to start over again in talks with new people. We'll be going over things we've already been discussing for years.''
 
 Mr. Wagner characterized the proposed Jamaica Federal building, which will house the Social Security Administration, as crucial to the economic revitalization and development of Jamaica. ''We have no way of knowing just what the new Administration will think of these programs but we don't imagine they will oppose any programs that have a thrust toward improving the city's economic status,'' he said.
 
 Negotiations for the transfer of the Jamaica site are expected to be concluded ''within a month or two,'' according to Alan Greenberg, acting director of the General Services Administration's space management division.
 
 City Council President Carol Bellamy, who is chairman of the Urban Development Action Grant program, agreed with Mr. Wagner about the importance of the Jamaica project. Other key projects requiring loan guarantees are the Portman hotel in Times Square and the South Street Seaport. Miss Bellamy said there was no way to speed H.U.D.  approval of the guarantees, which would total $41.5 million.
 
 The action grants are awarded four times a year on a competitive basis to localities throughout the nation. ''We could lose one of the projects,'' the City Council president said, ''but now is the time for us to act on both these matters because we are fairly sure of getting a sympathetic hearing.'' Miss Bellamy and other city officials expressed concern over personel changes and shifts in policy and their effect on programs such as the urban development action grants.
 
 At the Federal agencies, officials involved in implementing housing and community development programs said that delays were inevitable, the result more of bureaucratic procedures than differing priorities between the two Administrations.
 
 ''Funding in our agency is being handled no differently now than in the past,'' said Lawrence B. Simons, the H.U.D. assistant secretary for housing. He said his office was inundated with last-minute requests for approval of a variety of housing proposals. But ''nothing will happen before January in terms of funding,'' he said.
 
 ''We will have money going out this year at just about the same time it was distributed last year because the funding process doesn't change from year to year,'' Mr. Simons said.
 
 The same point was emphasized by officials at the Government Services Administration, where action is pending on a variety of building projects considered important to the city's economic development.
 
 In the case of the widley publicized proposal for a $281-million development the Brooklyn Army Terminal - a proposal that first requires sale of the waterfront parcel to the city by the G.S.A. - action is at best more than a month away, said Roy Markon, commissioner for Federal property resources.
 
 The terminal, vacated by the Army in 1975, is a 100-acre waterfront parcel considered promising for commerical and industrial use. It is now being partially utilized as a parking lot for city buses. The city has proposed leasing the land to Helmsley-Spear Inc., the realestate concern, for development.
 
 Mr. Markon said: ''We are bound by law to sell the property for its fair market value, and if we decide even to accept the city's sale offer, it still must be reviewed by both the House and Senate.'' If someone there raises questions, Mr. Markon explained,''it could mean delays going beyond a mandatory review period of 35 days.''
 
 Philip Blumenfeld, vice president of Helmsley-Spear, described these delays as ''potentially disastrous.'' He said, ''I wanted the terminal matter resolved yesterday,'' he said.
 
 ''We have worked long hours, inspecting every window in three and a half million square feet of space,'' he said. ''We tested every elevator, every sprinkler head, and every door. We prepared a budget nearly two years ago, based on inspections but what happens when you do this on a job you planned to have tenants actually leasing space by now? he said.
 
 Gloomily, Mr. Blumenfeld concluded: ''The consequences could be unfortunate for all concerned. Inevitably you reach the point where a project simply isn't feasible anymore.''
 
 Even less certain, said Mr. Markon, is the fate of two other key development projects for the city also awaiting action by the G.S.A.  The first of these involves a $35-million plan to convert the former Federal Archives Building, at 641 Washington Street in Greenwich Village, into a 340-unit luxury apartment house. The second is a $12 million proposal calling for construction of a film studio complex on a three-block building site in Astoria, Queens.
 
 The Archives building-apartment house conversion project would provide immediate jobs in contrast to the movie studio, which would nonethelss offer the Queens area the economic benefit of what officials call a ''multiplier effect.''
 
 ''While we believe the new Administration would be committed to programs promising economic development,'' said Kenneth Schuman, director of the city's Office of Economic Development, ''our fear is that our programs could become hopelessly bogged down, driving the developer to lose interest.
 
 Both the apartment project and the film studio are ''all set to go,'' said Steven Spinola, deputy director of the Office of Economic Development, once G.S.A. transfers the property. But Mr. Markon did not offer encouragement.''We are not talking about a sale here,'' he said, ''but G.S.A. giving the city excess land. There is no legal precedent for G.S.A. giving over land to the City of New York; we need a legal opinion from the Comptroller General.'' A favorable ruling may not come quickly, he said.
 
 Peter Peiser Jr., assistant director of the New York City's Washington office, believes that, over the long term, policy changes will be forthcoming under the Reagan Administration, principally in housing. The use of block grants in housing programs will probably be continued, he suggested.
 
 However, a cutback of in the Section 8 programs began to occur during the Carter Administration, and further cuts by the Reagan Administration would cause little surprise. ''You'll see the scaling down for the first time this year,'' said one city official.
 
 To William Woods, director of the Brooklyn office of the City Planning Department, there is a danger that cutbacks could undercut gains already achieved in housing rehabilitation. He described the Section 235 program, which allows mortgage-interest subsidies as low as 4 percent for the moderate-income home-buying families, as particularly important.
 
 ''In Brooklyn we have numbers of soundly constructed vacant brownstone houses in neighborhoods that still have a chance, like Bedford-Stuyvesant and Bushwick,'' Mr. Woods said. ''We can save those properties if Federal help continues at a significant enough level.''
 
 He added that the Democrats had shown a commitment to providing the help that neighborhoods need for survival. ''We hope the Republicans will share that understanding,'' he said.


PUBLIC HOUSING (92%); HOUSING AUTHORITIES (90%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (90%); CONSTRUCTION (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); URBAN DEVELOPMENT (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); REAL ESTATE (90%); RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY (90%); CITY LIFE (89%); CITIES (89%); CITY GOVERNMENT (89%); CONSERVATISM (78%); APPROVALS (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); HOUSING ASSISTANCE (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (77%); REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENT (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (76%); SOCIAL SECURITY (76%); US SOCIAL SECURITY (76%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (76%); MAYORS (75%); OFFICE PROPERTY (75%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); GRANTS & GIFTS (72%); LOW COST HOUSING SCHEMES (72%); EXECUTIVES (71%); LOW INCOME PERSONS (69%); 
