3S8G-CJF0-000B-Y0HY


The New York Times


OLD RICH, OIL RICH: THE WEST VS. OPEC


19801130T000000Z


''THE Western industrial countries no longer set the tone of the world economy,'' said Peter Oppenheimer, an Oxford University economist.  ''They are the reacters to events now, not initiators.''
 
 No one would have dreamed it just 20 years ago. Postwar reconstruction was over. Western nations, riding high from the rich 1950's, were about to embark on another decade of swelling prosperity. George C. Marshall, the United States Secretary for Foreign Affairs who had set up the postwar recovery plan, led the way in organizing a forum where the United States and its rich industrial partners would coordinate their economic policies.
 
 On Dec. 14, 1960, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development was born, a grouping of 24 nations, some former adversaries, which would help guide the fortunes of the one-half of the world that had not joined the Communist revolution. For a decade, all went pretty much as planned. Those days are over.
 
 After innumerable efforts to stem an ever-adverse tide in the 1970's, the Western industrial democracies plus Japan, are recognizing the slow but relentless shift of wealth and industry to parts of the world that were once their colonies. The most immediate manifestation of the shift is the potent combination of inflation and economic stagnation that has eaten away at the industrialized Establishment over the last seven years and seems set to continue doing so for quite a few more years.
 
 What once looked like a conspiracy of silence by Western leaders to conceal the sheer magnitude of the economic problems their countries face, is now starting to disintegrate under the cumulative impact of their failure to find solutions.
 
 FRANCE'S robust economist-Prime Minister, Raymond Barre, never tires of warning that the West must brace itself for another decade of sluggish growth and high unemployment while it adapts to ''the new realities'' of international economic life - expensive energy and the migration of traditional industries toward the southern half of the globe. For the first time, France's five-year economic plan contains no growth predictions; it merely warns that ''tomorrow will be worse than today.''
 
 Chancellor Helmut Schmidt of West Germany, now safely re-elected, is also starting to warn his compatriots - and the rest of the world - that his nation's ''economic miracle'' is not invulnerable to the recessionary forces loose in the world. ''Our partners tend to overestimate our strength and abilities,'' he said earlier this month. The comment had a familiar ring, given his nation's reluctance to take on the burden of leadership urged on it by the O.E.C.D.
 
 British Chancellor of the Exchequor, Denis Healey, when he left office last year, delivered the following verdict: ''All the evidence indicates that for the foreseeable future, the average growth of output in the free world is not going to recover to the level which we enjoyed during those golden years from 1951 to 1973.''
 
 Yet a beacon of optimism still glimmers at the elegant 18th-century mansion in eastern Paris that once belonged to the Rothschild family, and now houses the O.E.C.D. In September, Emile van Lennep, the O.E.C.D.'s Secretary General, told a somewhat incredulous meeting of the International Monetary Fund that the West could still look forward to ''recovery'' next year if it continues to fight inflation and preserves free trade.
 
 ''If you project a gloomy past into the future, it's bound to be gloomy too,'' said one senior O.E.C.D. staff economist, adding ''Western prosperity has been challenged, the question is what will the response be.''
 
 At the birthplace of the O.E.C.D., the 1960's are well remembered.  In that decade, its economies grew at around 4.5 percent a year on average, while inflation and unemployment hovered near 2 and 3 percent. But then came the sober 1970's. Growth rates slowed to around 3 percent on average. Since 1977, they have limped along at barely 2 percent. Inflation, meanwhile, shot up at a rate of 8 percent a year during the first half of the decade, accelerating to 12.6 percent in the year ended in September. Meanwhile a string of comfortable trading surpluses gave way to huge and sustained deficits under the impact of rising oil prices.
 
 Last week, the O.E.C.D. Secretariat admitted that the recovery it foresees next year will be the mildest upswing since World War II, with economic growth barely exceeding 2 percent on average and unemployment edging up to more than 25 million.
 
 While the official line is cautiously optimistic, the last decade is already littered with the wreckage of failed O.E.C.D. plans for promoting Western economic recovery that failed to appreciate the strength of inflationary forces in the world.
 
 As late as 1977 the O.E.C.D. still thought the Western world could blast itself back into the 1960's with a sustained reflationary program designed to achieve growth rates ''averaging around 5.5 percent a year for the O.E.C.D. area as a whole over the five years from 1975 to 1980,'' as recommended by a panel of experts it convened under the chairmanship of former Presidential economic adviser Paul McCracken.
 
 Even after the McCracken Report had been dismissed as likely only to add to the already serious inflation and payment problems, the O.E.C.D. continued to argue that an old-fashioned Keynsian shot in the arm would solve everyone's problems.
 
 In its celebrated ''locomotive'' recovery theory it called on the United States, West Germany and Japan, as the three strongest Western nations, to pull the world out of recession by expanding their economies faster. But Germany and Japan refused to play, and the United States boom of the early Carter years collapsed into an inflationary slump.
 
 Now the O.E.C.D. Secretariat has belatedly recognised that fighting inflation must remain the West's top priority for the foreseeable future. And privately many Secretariat econom ists share the pessimismof Mr. Barre and Mr. Healey, saying the world is entering a ''low growth tunnel'' in which the difference betwe en recovery and recession will become so small as to approach meaninglessness.
 
 In the hunt for the assassins of Western prosperity, the list of suspects keeps getting longer.  Believers in the Kondratieff ''long wave'' theory of economic history, see the downswing as the inevitable trough at the end of the fourth 50-year business cycle since the Industrial Revolution. Prof.  Walt Rostow of the University of Texas in Austin suggests more hopefully that it may be ''the early phase of the fifth Kondratieff upswing.''
 
 Politicians, not unnaturally, like to pin the blame on impersonal forces of history, forces beyond their control. ''Where the root cause of national dificulties lies in some weakness of the international system,'' Mr. Healey said last year, ''no solution can be found simply in the adjustment of national policies.''
 
 He blamed slow Western growth on rising oil prices, creeping protectionism that discourages trade and the breakdown of the fixed exchange rate system for major currencies.
 
 All three developments are clearly a big part of the story.  Exploding energy prices encouraged stag flation by draining away purchasing power while forcing up consumer prices. Yet countries like West Germany, Austria, the Netherlands and Switzerland adapted quite quickly to the first oil price explosion, enjoying lower inflation after it than before. Similarly, while all Western governments recognize the damage that violently fluctuating currency values do to trade and investment, Europe has enjoyed fixed exchange rates for the past three years under its new Monetary System. And while protect ionism is growing as unemployment climbs, it is not growing nearl y as fast as the pessimists predicted.
 
 A fourth, missing explanation for the West's disappointing preformance lies, in Mr. van Lennep's words, ''much nearer home.'' It is to be found in what he calls ''the loss of flexibility and dynamism which have made our economies much more inflation-prone.''
 
 After more than a decade of secure employment and steadily rising living standards, Western workers resist austerity by making inflationary wage demands. They refuse to leave declining industries and threaten to vote out governments that don't subsidize and protect them. Management, equally accustomed to an automatic leading role in world industry, has often failed to adapt to changing markets.
 
 What links all these explanations together is the changing balance of economic power in the world, which makes it increasingly difficult for the Western democracies to recover their momentum, even if they are willing to make the sacrifices involved.
 
 A S the authors of France's fifth plan put it, ''all countries have now become prisoners of their incompatible needs,'' a problem exacerbated by the fact that no one group of nations is in charge any more.
 
 No one doubts that most Western countries are trying to modernize their economies and the general rightward drift of political feeling among them may encourage governments to take the unpopular measures needed. Yet, as countries like Brazil, Taiwan, Argentina and Mexico develop - not just in terms of steel mills and textile factories but also in electronics, auto making and aviation - it is far from clear just what the industries of the West ought to be diversifying into.  In the view of French planners, it is the problem of ''industries without markets.''
 
 But even if Western investment does pick up, the danger remains that any recovery will be hit on the head by the monopoly power of the oil exporting countries and rising prices of other third-world commodities. The biggest OPEC exporters are all producing more oil than their governments, concerned about conserving their wealth-inthe-ground, really want. Petroleum output is more likely to go down than up in the years ahead. Meanwhile, the O.E.C.D. itself frequently warns that low investment in new raw material production during the 1970's makes any upsurge in demand vulnerable to another commodity boom.
 
 Industry, capital and demand are all present in abundance as the world moves from the low-growth 1970's into the unknown 1980's. But somehow they are all in the wrong places.
 
 Clearly, the impoverished third world has enough pent-up demand for Western goods to reflate the industrial economies without reigniting inflation as the so-called Brandt Commission report on world development pointed out earlier this year. But it lacks money and creditworthiness.
 
 Then too, as Western influence declines in the developing world, poor countries have turned away from liberal economic principals to embrace radical ideologies and vague demands for global reform, which deter foreign investment.
 
 Meanwhile, the surplus oil expor ting states find they have the money everybody else wants, but nowhere safe to invest it. So their surplus funds are piling up on an inverted an d increasingly shakylooking pyramid of credit that seems mor e of a threat than an aid to global recovery.
 
 The problem was seen clearly by Juan Pablo Perez Alfonso, the Venezuelan who was the guiding force behind OPEC. ''A wave of money can destroy as well as create,'' he said in 1973, speaking of his own nation's wealth. ''Will building the biggest and best-looking schools create the best education?'' A Quick View of The O.E.C.D.
 
 FOUNDED: December 1960, when the convention establishing the organization, a successor to the 1948 Organization for European Economic Cooperation, was signed. The organizer was George C.  Marshall, the United States Secretary for Foreign Affairs for whom the postwar European recovery program was named. HEADQUARTERS: Paris MEMBERS: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Britain, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United States and West Germany.
 
 ORGANIZATION: The Secretary General, Emile van Lennep of the Netherlands, who has held the post since 1969, presides over a council composed of one representative from each member country. Once a year, usually in June, there is a meeting in Paris of top economic officials from each member country. AIMS: ''To promote economic and social wellfare throughout the O.E.C.D. area by coordinating member country policies to that end, to contribute to the good function of the world economy notably by stimulating a nd harmonizing its members' efforts in favor of developing co untries.'' Collects and publishes a wide spectrum of statistical d ata on such subjects as international trade, financial market trends and economic indicators in member countries. Also issues foreca sts of economic activity. Such other groups as the Nuclear Energ y Agency and the International Energy Agencies, while independent, operate under O.E.C.D. auspices with the aim of coordinating members' interests in energy.


THIRD WORLD AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES; OIL (PETROLEUM) AND GASOLINE; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL TRADE; INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND WORLD MARKET; UNITED STATES ECONOMY; ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS; FUTURES TRADING; PRICES  INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (91%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (90%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (90%); CARTELS (86%); FUTURES (79%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); ECONOMIC DECLINE (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); RECESSION (78%); DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (76%); ECONOMIC POLICY (74%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (74%); SECURITIES TRADING (74%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (73%); POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION (72%); TRENDS (70%); PRIME MINISTERS (69%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (67%); 
