3S8G-CF00-000B-Y1GN


The New York Times


HOMES SELL ON CREATIVE FINANCING


19801227T000000Z


The real estate market is staggering under the powerful impact of rising home mortgage rates and dwindling supplies of lendable money, but some homes are still changing hands.
 
 The answer for many buyers and sellers is so-called creative financing - loans made outside banks and savings and loan associations.
 
 In southern California, where mortgage rates range up to 18 percent, surveys show that up to 85 percent of all loans are being made through nontraditional sources, according to Julie Stewart of the California Association of Realtors.
 
 ''Creative financing is the only way to buy today unless you want to pay cash,'' Miss Stewart said. That is not an option for many people.
 
 'Groaning and Moaning'
 
 ''The overall marketplace is grinding and groaning and moaning,'' Richard Rosenthal, an investment banker, said. ''But still there are loan arrangements being made and there are houses still selling.''
 
 Among the financing alternatives that are becoming more popular, according to industry sources, is seller financing, in which the seller takes a first or second mortgage from the buyer. That is often done in connection with the buyer's assuming the seller's old mortgage, which is usually at a much lower rate of interest than is being charged now.
 
 Builder financing has also been used, at rates as low as 11 1/2 percent, usually because the builder made arrangements for the money months ago, when rates were lower. Other possibilities include leases with options to buy, trades of property, and contracts for deeds, in which the original owner continues to be the owner of record until all payments are made.
 
 Alternative financing can make a difference. Mr. Rosenthal said the agreed-upon interest rate for seller-financed deals currently ranged from 11 percent to 15 percent, much less than what thrift institutions charged. Delay in Funds for Seller
 
 A major problem, of course, is that in any form of seller financing the seller does not get his money right away -and he may need it to buy another home.
 
 Some industry sources predict the situation will get worse before it gets better. Money is available. The American Savings and Loan Association here, for example, is offering mortgage loans of up to $300,000 but at a 17 1/4 percent interest rate and with a 30 percent down payment. The Gibraltar Savings and Loan Association is charging 18 percent for mortgage loans of more than $93,750. Smaller loans are available at 16 percent.
 
 Bruce Sickenger, vice president of Far West Savings, said the number of home loans it was making was down 80 percent from the comparable period last year. ''The psychology of buying at today's interest rates is perilous,'' he added. A spokesman for the Wells Fargo Bank said it no longer made long-term, fixed-rate mortgages, granting instead only five-year loans with no guarantee they would be extended or at what rate.
 
 But almost all report buyer interest continues to be high. ''We still have a positive inflow of population, the splitting up of families is creating more households out of the same number of people and, to compound that, the new housing stock is several hundred thousand units behind demand in California alone,'' Mr. Rosenthal said. Need for Flexibility Seen
 
 ''We're back to the old story of negotiating,'' he added. ''The seller has to be more flexible today and the buyer has to be more understanding. It's not an ideal situation, but the goal (owning a home) is so important that many still feel it's worthwhile to suffer and sacrifice.''
 
 Meanwhile, credit on other kinds of major purchases continues to be a problem.  Lee Rowell, vice president of Avco Financial Savings, said it was no longer handling installment sales contracts. The contracts are used by retailers that cannot finance consumer purchases of highticket items, such as major appliances and furniture.
 
 Retailers said they were rejecting applications for installment contracts from buyers with even minor infractions on their credit records.
 
 ''You really have to be a super-solid citizen (to be approved),'' said Lou Donato, sales manager for the W. Simmons Mattress Company.  ''If they can find any reason to turn it down, they will turn it down,'' he added, referring to financing applications forwarded by the mattress retailer for approval.


INTEREST RATES (91%); ECONOMIC NEWS (91%); HOUSING MARKET (91%); REAL ESTATE (90%); MORTGAGE RATES (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); MORTGAGE LOANS (90%); MORTGAGE BANKING & FINANCE (90%); SAVINGS & LOANS (89%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (78%); PROPERTY PURCHASE AGREEMENTS (78%); REAL ESTATE MARKET (78%); INVESTMENT BANKING (77%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (77%); SECOND MORTGAGES (75%); POLLS & SURVEYS (72%); 
