3S8G-CJW0-000B-Y1CH


The New York Times


uf2Anderson, Clayton: More Than Cotton


19801128T000000Z


The original Claytons and Andersons probably would not recognize the large, aggressive, diversified, acquisitionminded entity that still bears their names.
 
 In 1904, William Lockhart Clayton founded Anderson, Clayton & Company in Oklahoma City as a cotton merchant partnership with his brother-in-law, Frank E. Anderson, and Frank's brother Monroe. The following year Mr. Clayton's brother Ben was brought into the business and the operation was expanded to encompass cotton-ginning and oil processing.
 
 Today Anderson, Clayton remains in the cotton business, although it has shifted its base to this energy capital. But it is also much more. It is the manufacturer of Seven Seas salad dressing, Chiffon margarine and other food products, from cheese to mayonnaise and shortening. It is an international oilseed processor, coffee merchant and consumer food concern with substantial operations in Brazil and Mexico. It also owns two insurance companies, a warehousing operation and an industrial equipment maker.
 
 May Expand Still More
 
 While the recession and rising costs put pressure on earnings in the latest quarter, the company gives all indications that its expansion is not about to end soon.
 
 Last month the company acquired the Igloo Corporation, a maker of ice chests and coolers, from the Coca-Cola Bottling Company of New York for about $50 million in cash, its third acquisition in three years.
 
 T.J. Barlow, the company's chairman who is known as Jim, is still busy shopping for more domestic acquisitions, thanks to substantial unused debt capacity and a horde of cash and marketa ble securities that will gro w to about $100 million by next summer.
 
 ''We are active and interested,'' he told shareholders at the annual meeting last month.  That interest , he said in a recent intervie w, is focused in the purchase of a food company and another proper ty-casualty insurer.  They will not need to sell additional stock to raise money for acquistions, Mr. Barlow said. In fact, Anders on, Clayton has bought almost 500,000 shares back recently. Wants More Debt
 
 One thing the company must do, he added, is to take on more debt.  Mr. Barlow said he thinks a debt-to-capital ratio of 30 percent would suit Anderson, Clayton best. It would also help pay for a sizable acquisition.
 
 For the last decade the company's earnings have climbed an average of 13 percent a year. For the fiscal year ended last June 30, earnings rose 8 percent to $52.7 million, or $4 a share, from $48.8 million a year earlier. Sales rose to $1.7 billion, against $1.5 billion for the 1979 fiscal year. The impact of the recession, however, can be seen in the latest quarterly results. In the present fiscal year's first quarter, ended Sept. 30, earnings declined 37.3 percent to $5.2 million, or 40 cents a share, from $8.3 million, or 62 cents a share, in the period of a year before. Sales increased 12.4 percent to $400 million from $356 million.
 
 That profit slide prompted Ed Sharpe, an analyst at Morgan Stanley & Company in New York, to downgrade his 1981 earnings estimate from $4.30 a share to $4, although he later conceded that was ''overreacting.''A Sleeping Giant?
 
 Roger Liddell, an analyst with Tucker, Anthony & R.L. Day Inc. in New York, called the company ''a sleeping giant'' that will ''lay out millions in cash for an acquisition without batting an eyelash.''
 
 He added: ''They are hardly known now and they're incompletely perceived. That doesn't happen every day with an A-rated, Big Board company.''
 
 While at least some of the company's activities have gotten attention - its long and contentious but ultimately unsuccessful fight to acquire the Gerber Products Company, for instance - the low level of awareness is at least partly attributable to the 37.2 percent equity ownership by company officials and directors and a capital structure composed of only 6 percent long-term debt.
 
 Gerber was not its only unsuccessful target. Company officials recalled that a 1976 proposal to acquire Stokely-Van Camp Inc. fell through because of a personality conflict between Anderson, Clayton officials and Alfred Stokely.
 
 Analysts say that management can spend a great deal of time on acquisitions because the subsidiaries are basically taking care of themselves. International Operations
 
 Its international operations in Mexico, with its newly discovered oil reserves, and Brazil, where the Government emphasizes agricultural exports including soybeans and coffee, represent 40 percent of total operations.
 
 Mr. Sharpe at Morgan Stanley estimates real population growth in both countries at 3 percent, compared with 1 percent in the United States. As a result, the company's stakes in oilseed processing, consumer and institutional foods are well positioned to meet increased demand.
 
 Its operations in these countries has also provided Anderson, Clayton with experience is managing amid double-digit inflation. In Mexico it is now 26 percent a year and in Brazil a rampant 108 percent.
 
 Mr. Barlow says: ''One thing is very obvious. You've got to raise your prices. There's no way to sit there and hope that something's going to get better,'' Useful Experience
 
 Such experience, he noted, may prove to be valuable in this country as well, if inflation continues to climb.
 
 Domestically, Anderson, Clayton is the largest American processor of cottonseed. It also enjoys geographic diversification with mills in California and Arizona to offset the threat of drought in Texas.  Last summer's heat wave, for example, did not dilute inventories because the company was ready with a backlog.
 
 Its Dallas-based food division, whose leading products are Seven Seas and Chiffon, is continuing to expand and introduce new items.  Chiffon has 12 percent of the soft margarine market (or about 3 percent of all margarine sales), and Seven Seas accounts for 12 percent of all pourable dressings sales. A new dressing, Seven Seas Buttermilk Recipe, was recently introduced on the West Coast, following the successful debut earlier this year of Seven Seas CreamyBacon.
 
 The company is also trying to capitalize on the alleged danger of high cholesterol levels with another new offering, New Age, a nondairy cheese substitute that is competing head-to -head against Kraft's Golden Image and Borden's Lite Line.


COMPANY AND ORGANIZATION PROFILES; DIVERSIFICATION OF BUSINESS  COTTON & COTTONSEED (90%); FOOD & BEVERAGE (89%); FOOD INDUSTRY (89%); RECESSION (89%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); COMPANY EARNINGS (89%); MISC OILSEED PROCESSING (77%); CORPORATE DEBT (77%); SALES FIGURES (77%); DRESSING & SAUCE MFG (74%); INSURANCE (73%); INTERIM FINANCIAL RESULTS (72%); SHAREHOLDER MEETINGS (72%); SOFT DRINK INDUSTRY (72%); COTTON GINNING (72%); GRAIN & OILSEED PROCESSING (70%); INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT MFG (69%); WAREHOUSING & STORAGE (68%); PROPERTY & CASUALTY INSURANCE (68%); SHAREHOLDERS (67%); 
