3S8G-CJS0-000B-Y14J


The New York Times


YOUR MONEY;AID FOR PARENTS TO STUDENTS


19801129T000000Z


FOR years, middle- and upper-income families sending their children through college were all but ignored by Governme nt financial aid programs, but new sources of assistance will become available to themin 1981.
 
 As a result of the $48.4 billion Education Amendments of 1980 signed by President Carter last month, a new parent loan program makes it possible for any family, regardless of its income, to borrow up to $3,000 a year per student at 9 percent interest.
 
 In addition, the bill increases the total a student can borrow under the guaranteed student loan program to $12,500 from $7,500 over a five-year period. This means that, between the new parent loans and the regular student loans, any family can now borrow up to $5,500 a year per student for school.
 
 The only drawback is that the interest rate on the student loans rises to 9 percent from the current 7 percent, effective Jan. 1. Even here, however, there are many ways for borrowers to qualify for the old lower rate.
 
 Students who already have loans under the program will be able to continue borrowing at 7 percent until they complete their education - even if it takes years. ''It means that 10 years from today, if a student goes into a bank for a graduate school loan and still owes $4.32 on his original 7 percent undergraduate loan, he will still qualify for the 7 percent rate,'' said David C. Bayer, chief of the guranteed student loan branch of the Department of Education in Washington.
 
 This low interest rate is also available to students who take out loans before the end of the year, provided they are currently attending school. But even though there is technically another month left before the interest rate on these loans rises, some states have already closed the borrowing window.
 
 ''I can fully understand,'' Mr. Bayer said, adding that several states, such as New York and Pennsylvania, had decided not to approve any new loans until Jan. 1 to give them time to adjust their computer systems for the new higher rate.
 
 But in some areas, there is still time for first-time borrowers to qualify for the 7 percent rate. New Jersey and Connecticut, for example, say they will grant loans to current students at the lower rate in December as long as the students are state residents or enrolled in schools within the state.
 
 Although the parent loan program becomes legally effective on Jan.  1, Government officials do not expect the program to become fully operative until the spring, for use in the 1981-82 academic year.  The reason is that many states must pass enabling legislation to set up the new loan program since their current statutes for college financial aid cover only students and not parents.
 
 The Congressional Budget Office projects a ''relatively low demand'' for parent loans, estimating that 81,000 loans, totaling $237 billion, will be made. But Mr. Bayer disagrees, noting that the parent loans are very attractive to lenders because they are easier to administer than student loans. The reason is that families must start repaying their loans within 60 days of taking them out, while students have until they are out of school, plus a six-month grace period, down from the nine to 12 months allowed under the old program.
 
 ''Student loans require a lot of work by lenders,'' he said. ''They have to track down the student and set up a repayment schedule. But they can treat parent loans like any other consumer loans and just put them into the computer.''
 
 Despite the higher rate on student loans scheduled to take effect next year, they, along with the new parent loans, are a bargain still considering that regular consumer loan rates are now at 20 percent in some states.
 
 The bargain is footed by the taxpayer, through the Federal Government, which pays lenders an ''interest supplement'' that makes up the difference between the low interest rate charged to borrowers and the going market rate. The deal may get even sweeter after 1982, when the interest rate on both types of loans will be permitted to drop to 8 percent if the yield on three-month Treasury bills averages less than 9 percent over the previous 12-month period.
 
 Further information on the new loan programs is available from the financial aid officer at colleges and universities, local bankers and the state agency that administers the student-parent loan program. It may vary among states, but the state department of education can advise borrowers on which department is responsible.A free booklet, ''Student Consumer's Guide,'' published by the Of fice of Student and Financial Assistance of the United States De partment of Education, Washington, D.C. 20202, is also available.


UNITED STATES POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; LAW AND LEGISLATION; FEDERAL AID (US); EDUCATION AND SCHOOLS; EDUCATION (SECONDARY); CREDIT (SPECI; IC US); INTEREST (MO; EY)  STUDENT FINANCIAL AID (92%); STUDENT LOANS (91%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); CHILDREN (90%); PERSONAL FINANCE (90%); FAMILY (90%); EDUCATION LAW (90%); INTEREST RATES (89%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); UPPER INCOME PERSONS (78%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); MIDDLE INCOME PERSONS (78%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (78%); BUDGETS (78%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (73%); POLITICS (72%); APPROVALS (61%); 
