3S8G-CK60-000B-Y2BG


The New York Times


Talking Business with Angelo R. Arena of Marshall Field Rates a Concern In Retailing


19801125T000000Z


Marshall Field & Company, which for years has been dominated by its huge Chicago department store division, has ranged across the country in recent years in an effort to establish itself as a national chain. Only a few weeks ago, it completed the acquisition of the J.B. Ivey chain in the Carolinas and Florida, which pushed Field's sales this year above $1 billion for the first time. Last May, it acquired the six Union Company stores in Columbus, Ohio, and last year bought the 18 John Breuner furniture stores in California.  But its biggest move may be in the Sun Belt, with its own store in Houston.
 
 These expansions, added to the Frederick & Nelson and Halle Brothers department stores that it operates in Seattle and Cleveland, respectively, have been a major goal of Angelo R. Arena, who three years ago was hired from Neiman-Marcus, where he had been chairman, to be Field's chairman, president, and chief executive. In a recent interview, Mr. Arena talked about the outlook for retailing and Marshall Field.
 
 Q. What is ahead for retailing as it heads into the holiday season? A. The overwhelming mandate in the Presidential election should generally put retailers in a better frame of mind. The more conservative policies of Ronald Reagan would have a major influence in getting inflation, which is the consumer's main concern, under control. The positive prospects should make people feel good about things, and that makes for better customers. On the other hand, the resurgence of high interest rates could have a negative effect on the economy and on retail sales. The rising prime will make people hesitant once again, and if the rate continues up, so will inflation.
 
 Q. How do you see the Christmas business? A. The season will be fairly good, but I don't think it will be as good as I projected it a month or two ago, when it appeared that the recession was easing up.  Now, with the rising interest rates, I have to be more cautious. But I do think that the trend will continue in which upper-moderate and higher-price goods enjoy better sales than moderate-priced goods, because the goods with higher price tags appeal more to customers who are less affected by swings in interest rates and inflation.  Household durables sales could slow down, too, because higher interest rates will hurt home buying and the need to buy major home items.
 
 Q. Is your company's expansion program working out? A. We are into the Southeast now for the first time, and that gives us a coast-tocoast penetratio n. In general, I'm positive for the short andlong term abo ut the company, and I think we are starting to move, short of the effects of a further jump in interest rates. We have doubled the n umber of our stores and markets in the last two years, although not, of course, without growing pains. Now, we want to give our various s tore divisions a chance to grow by committing the company's res ources to support the divisions' potential.
 
 Q. Any further acquisitions in view? A. We have no conversations with anyone at present, but I wouldn't want to predict. New York City is a great market, but not one we would want to enter with a Marshall Field store. This area is already well retailed with such stores as Saks Fifth Avenue, Bloomingdale's and B. Altman. We've come a tremendous way toward where we want to be in expansion, probably as fast as we logically could. Now we want to redirect our energies to building up our existing companies.
 
 Q. There are still lots of places without a Marshall Field store.  Which ones interest you most? A. In a couple of years, we may look at acquiring or opening an apparel business on the West Coast, in addition to our full-line stores already there, and there's also the East, where we aren't now re presented. But I don't see those as a priority for us, like the priority of expandi ng on a national basis, which we have pursued.
 
 Q. How have you found it, taking over a large, diversified retail chain after running divisional groups before? A. My very first board meeting at Field's was, incidentally, the first board meeting I ever attended. So you can understand when I say you learn to swim fast, with all the trepidation of heading a large company. But it has turned out to be a tremendous growth period in my life, very exciting and stimulating. Isadore Barmash


RETAIL STORES AND TRADE; MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS AND DIVESTITURES  RETAILERS (92%); INTERVIEWS (90%); STADIUMS & ARENAS (90%); DEPARTMENT STORES (90%); INTEREST RATES (89%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); RETAIL SALES (78%); DURABLE GOODS (75%); RECESSION (74%); ELECTIONS (72%); FURNITURE STORES (70%); PRICE INCREASES (69%); EXECUTIVES (67%); CONSERVATISM (66%); HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (66%); CHRISTMAS (66%); 
