3S8G-CHT0-000B-Y3X8


The New York Times


MONEY SUPPLY UP


19801206T000000Z


The Federal Reserve System reported yesterday that the nation's basic money supply increased $1.2 billion in the last week of November, a gain that surprised economists and brought predictions of even higher interest rates ahead.
 
 ''The consensus within the money markets was that the money supply would probably decline this week by a half to one billion,'' said Donald E. Maude, economist and chairman of the interest-rate policy committee for Merrill Lynch. ''The increase isn't huge, but it was not expected. That's the problem.''
 
 Allen Sinai, senior economist of Data Resources Inc., a consulting firm, said, ''The excessive money growth will just increase the pressure on short-term interest rates, probably sending them to record levels.'' 20 Percent-Plus Prime Rate Seen
 
 Mr. Sinai and others predicted that the prime rate - the posted level that banks charge their most creditworthy corporate customers - would soon rise to more than 20 percent from its current level of 19.
 
 Some economists say that excessive growth of the money supply exacerbates inflation. The Fed sets targets for monetary growth, but so far this year the growth has exceeded the objectives by a fairly wide margin.
 
 The Fed's maximum target for M-1B, the basic measure of the money supply that includes cash in the hands of the public plus all types of checking accounts in depository institutions, was $412 billion for this year, an annual increase of 6.5 percent. But the basic money supply has grown at a 14.5 percent annual rate during the last six months and is up 7.8 percent in the past 52 weeks. In the week ended Nov. 26, it rose from an average of $413.5 billion, to $414.7 billion.
 
 However, the Fed has been moving to curb monetary growth recently.  In the previous week, for instance, the Fe d r eported that the basic money supply had declined by $2.1 billion. Mo st economists expected the tightening to be in evidence again in the figures reported yesterday, as the Fed scrambles to approach, at least, its yearly goal for money growth. Thus, Wall Street econ omists were surprised by the advance. 'Reacting, Not Acting'
 
 ''It's past the point where the Fed has control,'' said one money market participant. ''They are reacting, not acting.''
 
 The Fed also reported that commercial and industrial loans on the books of the country's large banks rose sharply in the week ended Nov. 26, by $1.92 billion. Increased loan activity by corporations is often viewed as a sign of a strengthening economy, as companies add to their borrowings to finance greater production.
 
 But in the current economic setting, characterized by high interest rates and little strength in the auto and housing industries, the increased demand for corporate loans is viewed as a sign of weakness. Much of the recent rise in loans to corporations is attributable to the need to finance an involuntary buildup of inventories, as customers fail to buy products.
 
 Such a development is generally viewed as a prelude to a recession, which economists increasingly say may be in the offing. ''We're seeing all the ingredients of a recession,'' said Mr. Maude of Merrill Lynch.


MONEY SUPPLY (94%); ECONOMIC NEWS (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); INTEREST RATES (91%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); CENTRAL BANKS (90%); PRIME RATES (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); ECONOMIC RECOVERY (78%); STATISTICS (78%); CHECKING & SAVINGS ACCOUNTS (77%); 
