3S8G-CDS0-000B-Y0YT


The New York Times


ECONOMIC AFFAIRS;THAT STOCKMAN KEMP PROPOSAL


19801228T000000Z


T HE central dilemmas of economic policy today continue to be those that drove the Carter Administration out of office: Can we revitalize the economy, raise productivity, reduce unemployment, while at the same time reducing the stubbornly high inflation rate.
 
 In mid-November, two of President-elect Reagan's closest advisers, Congressmen David Stockman and Jack Kemp, put forth a bold proposal ''to avoid a G.O.P. economic Dunkirk.''
 
 The Stockman/Kemp memo correctly notes that the short-run economic outlook facing the Reagan Administration is grim. On top of our chronic maladies, 1981 is likely to witness several further acute ailments: a surge in oil prices, the dropping of the recession's second shoe, a 1981 Federal budget deficit of $50 billion, and the continued adverse effects of the gung-ho regulatory programs of the 70's.
 
 The two Reagan advisers recommended that soon after inauguration the President declare a national economic emergency and then push an emergency economic program. The proposal includes five elements:
 
 1. The first two installments of the Kemp-Roth tax cuts, plus accelerated depreciation and other small cuts.  2. A $30 billion to $50 billion expenditure cut over the next couple of years. For the first time, we began to have an idea where Reagan cuts may come -mainly from non-Social Security entitlements such as food stamps and public works and employment programs.
 
 3. A proposed major rollback of Federal social regulations, particularly in environment, health and safety.  4. To prepare for round three of oil price increases, an immediate decontrol of oil prices and removal of several restrictions on fuel use and energy production. They suggest an immediate decontrol of oil prices and removing several restrictions on fuel use and energy production.
 
 5. Finally, a new accord between the Executive and the Federal Reserve to complete the monetarist revolution of October 1979: monetary policy should eschew all consideration of ''extraneous'' variables like interest rates and recessions. Monetary policy should focus solely on slowing monetary growth to prudent rates.
 
 The first question raised by the Stockman/Kemp plan is whether the United States economy is truly in a state of emergency. Are Americans about to be swept onto the barrier beaches by a hyperinflationary blitzkrieg of zealous McGovernites? Is our only hope to be rescued by an expeditionary force of supply-side theorists?
 
 The analogy to Dunkirk is inept. Rather, we are bogged down in a war of attrition where every effort to improve our economic performance is rebuffed by a new assault of bad news. Thus, just as we prepared for a lull in world oil prices after the Iranian revolution, the Iran-Iraq war broke out and sent oil prices up once again. A better analogy would be to say that economic policy must help us to emerge from the stagflationary muds of Verdun.
 
 Will emergency shock treatment help us break through the inflationary lines? There is some merit in pursuing a comprehensive approach as a way of overcoming special-interest barriers. This approach helped President Nixon's New Economic Policy in 1971 and President Carter's National Energy Policy in 1977. Such a step is perilous, however, for it spends precious political capital in a highly risky venture.
 
 Moveover, there is a special irony in a proposal of emergency shock treatment emanating from the G.O.P. The party that won on the platform of reducing Government intervention now proposes to open the Federal Office of Economic Electric Shock Treatment.
 
 A SIDE from the plea for urgency, does the Stockman/Kemp plan make sense as a way of improving the economic fundamentals?  Parts of the plan seem well conceived but enormously controversial. Thus the regulatory, expenditure, and energy reforms of points two, three and five - designed to provide a better balance between the costs and benefits of Federal programs - should be at he top of the agenda of next year's economic policy. But it is questionable whether 15 years of careful legislation should be gutted in 100 days.
 
 However, the central flaw in the plan lies in its inability to face up to the enormous costs of emerging from our stagflationary muds of Verdun. As in earlier statements of Reagan economic policy, there is no clearly articulated anti-inflation plan. Nowhere is there any weapon trained directly on the wage-price spiral that is so firmly dug into the economic trenches. Are they giving up the anti-inflation flank and preparing to live with 10 to 12 percent inflation indefinitely?
 
 One approach to slowing inflation is economic slack. This approach appears to be rejected by the supply-sider's emphasis on promoting rapid growth through tax cuts. As noted in the accompanying table, the fiscal package described above does not appear overly expansionary over the next three years. However, the program will probably leave a Federal deficit of at least $50 billion annually in the foreseeable future. Such a fiscal jolt would run the risk of scaring financial markets, raising interest rates even higher, and, if rapid growth actually occurs, exacerbating the inflationary outlook.
 
 The most troubling aspect of the Stockman/Kemp plan lies in its monetarist underpinning. Today's skyrocketing interest rates result from a collision between high growth rates of nominal gross national product and the Federal Reserve's low monetary growth targets. Yet, the G.O.P. strategists want to redouble the effort to control monetary aggregates.
 
 Such a policy is akin to putting the same amount of fuel in the furnace whether it is June or January. Just this view, embodied in the Federal Reserve policy since October 1979, has led to the heightened financial instability over the last 14 months.
 
 The optimistic forecast shown above assumes no collision between fiscal and monetry policy. If the hard-core monetarists win Mr.  Reagan's heart, however, a more likely outcome is continuing high interest rates and little economic growth.
 
 In sum, the Stockman/Kemp plan represents the first public airing of a serious economic strategy for the Reagan Administration. The plan makes sense for energy, deregulation and expenditure cutting.  But the fundamental impossibility of reconciling an expansionary fiscal policy, a monetarist financial policy and an aversion to wageprice policy remains the Reagan Administration's central dilemma. Unless one of these three gives, Mr. Reagan will find that, in attempting to prevent a G.O.P. Dunkirk, he has led the country even deeper into its economic quagmire.---------------------------------------------------------------------William Nordhaus is John Musser Professor of Economics at Yale and a former member of President Carter's Council of Economic Advisers.


ECONOMIC NEWS (91%); ECONOMIC POLICY (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (90%); PRICE INCREASES (89%); BANKING & FINANCE (89%); RECESSION (89%); OIL & GAS PRICES (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); PRICE CHANGES (89%); ENERGY & UTILITY DEREGULATION (88%); MONETARY POLICY (85%); BUDGETS (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); INFLATION (78%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); ECONOMIC INDICATORS (77%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (74%); CRUDE OIL MARKETS (74%); TAXES & TAXATION (73%); INTEREST RATES (72%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (72%); TAX LAW (71%); SOCIAL SECURITY (71%); BUDGET DEFICITS (69%); DEPRECIATION (66%); NATIONAL DEBT (54%); BEACHES (50%); 
