3S8G-CH10-000B-Y1W4


The New York Times


PRIME SURGES TO 20%; DOW TUMBLES 17.83


19801211T000000Z


In an ominous sign for the economy, the prime lending rate rose a full percentage point yesterday, to 20 percent, reaching the record set last April shortly after President Carter declared a national emergency to deal with inflation.
 
 Bankers predicted that, if the Federal Reserve System continued to pursue its restrictive monetary policies, the prime would climb even further.
 
 ''If rates stay at this level for any sustained period, it would have a dire impact on the economy,'' said Alfred Brittain 3d, chairman of the Bankers Trust Company. Small Concerns Vulnerable
 
 Economists say that small and medium-sized companies are especially vulnerable to the high interest rates. ''These rates are putting us out of business,'' said Russell M. Rockwell, owner of the Rockwell Equipment Company in Hamilton, Ohio, in a telephone interview yesterday. The company, which has sales of about $1 million a year, is a distributor of agricultural and industrial equipment.
 
 ''I don't think the Federal Reserve knows what it's doing,'' Mr.  Rockwell said. ''It's like a 2-year-old kid squeezing the kitten to death, and he doesn't realize he's doing it.''
 
 One farm-equipment producer has 12 dealers in the Ohio-Kentucky region in the process of liquidation, Mr. Rockwell reported. His own company is now paying 20 1/4 percent for its money, and ''I expect that to go up,'' Mr. Rockwell said.
 
 Companies that deal in high-priced goods and operate on small profit margins are particularly affect ed by h igh interest rates, economists say. If sales slump, as they have, the dealers must borrowto finance their inventories. The higher the rate of interest, the more expensive these costs become. Savings Banks Under Strain
 
 Among other industries that are under particular strain are savings banks and savings and loan associations. These institutions must finance low-yielding mortgages with today's high-cost money. Many of their mortgages were made years ago, when the interest rates they charged were 7 percent or less. Today, the cost of a large portion of their deposits is about 16 percent.
 
 The Chase Manhattan Bank, the nation's third largest, was the first to increase the prime rate to 20 percent yesterday. Chase was quickly followed by other large banks across the nation, ranging from the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company and the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company to the Bank of America in San Francisco, the Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh, the First National Bank in Chicago and dozens of others.
 
 The prime, according to Thomas C. Theobald, senior executive vice president of Citibank, is comparable to the contractual rate on oil.  It applies to longer-term commitments that banks have with very large customers, those that borrow millions of dollars at a time. Options of Big Companies
 
 Large companies are also able to borrow from banks in the equivalent of the so-called spot market for oil. If there is a glut of money, these companies can shop for credit at rates somet imes wellbelow the pri me. Among their options are foreign markets and the domestic comm ercial-paper market, through which companies lend among themselves.
 
 Smaller companies, however, have fewer alternatives and most pay rates scaled up from the prime. Depending on a company's creditworthiness and its overall relationship with its bank, the rate it pays could be anywhere from below the prime to several percentage points above the prime.
 
 Mr. Brittain of Bankers Trust said he believed that interest rates were reaching a peak and that economic disaster would be avoided.  From his bank's dealings with its customers, he believes that the economy is much weaker than indicated by some of the figures released by the Government.
 
 ''I very truly believe we're in the death throes of the present convulsions,'' Mr. Brittain said. These high-interest-rate periods usually last only one or two months, and that means ''we're at least halfway through the worst,'' he added. ''These rates are unsustainable, I don't think they'll continue,'' Mr. Brittain said.


ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); INTEREST RATES (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); PRIME RATES (90%); MORTGAGE BANKING & FINANCE (89%); SAVINGS & LOANS (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); CENTRAL BANKS (77%); MONETARY POLICY (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); LIQUIDATIONS (75%); SMALL BUSINESS (75%); BUSINESS CLOSINGS (74%); AGRICULTURAL EQUIPMENT (73%); COMPANY PROFITS (73%); FINANCIAL RESULTS (73%); ECONOMIC POLICY (72%); EXECUTIVES (72%); 
