3S8G-CDJ0-000B-Y0DY


The New York Times


A ROUGH YEAR FOR CANNON MILLS


19801230T000000Z


When the Cannon Mills Company entered the recession of 1980, analysts say, it was probably in sounder condition than most other major members of the textile industry. Nonetheless, its good fortune did not last out the year.
 
 For 1979, Cannon had sales of $608.7 million, the best in its 93-year history. And earnings, raised by revenues from two acquisitions and an accounting change, had climbed to $41.2 million, up from $24.4 million in 1978. Cannon's long-term debt - at $13.7 million -was small by today's standards.
 
 By last fall, however, the picture was different. On Oct. 17, the chairman, Harold Hornaday, abruptly resigned, and that same day the company reported a loss for the third quarter. Then the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union, fresh from negotiating its first labor contract with a longtime foe, J.P. Stevens & Company, said it would next aim its resources at the thousands of unorganized production workers at Cannon Mills.
 
 Higher manufacturing costs, lower sales of high-profit items and higher cotton costs led to the third-quarter losses, according to Otto Stolz, Cannon's new chairman. For the quarter, Cannon lost $804,000, compared with a profit of $7 million in the same quarter the year before. After-Tax Write-Off
 
 The company, based in Kannapolis, N.C., also had an after-tax write-off of $4 million in the second quarter - the result of the extension of $21.7 million in credit to a distributor that was unable to pay the debt.
 
 Shortly after Mr. Hornaday's resignation was announced, two of the company's outside directors quit without explanation. Both men - Thomas Storrs, chairman of N.C.N.B. Corporation, holding company for North Carolina National Bank, and Colin Stokes, retired chairman of R.J. Reynolds Industries Inc. - refused to say why they had quit.  Mr. Hornaday, who has declined interviews, cited personal reasons for his resignation. He will remain as a consultant at the company.
 
 Textile industry analysts have concluded that the company's financial difficulties and Mr. Hornaday's departure were linked. One analyst simply pointed to the sequence of events. ''The first was running into the red; the second, Hornaday left.''
 
 According to Mr. Stolz, credit operations had been under the direct supervision of Mr. Hornaday, as were cotton buying and manufacturing.
 
 Recently, a North Carolina newspaper, The Charlotte Observer, reported that Mr. Hornaday's resignation had been forced as a result of the soured credit arrangement, with Peak Textiles Inc., a Georgia company that distributed Cannon products, Detailed Investigation
 
 The arrangement began in 1970 with the extension of unsecured credit. Cannon disclosed its problems with Peak in a footnote in this year's second-quarter report issued July 11. But Mr. Stolz recently disclosed that the incident had also resulted in a detailed investigation for which Cannon called in outside lawyers and accountants.
 
 He said in a telephone interview that the investigation had ended with no findings of questionable activities. ''There was nothing improper, illegal or in any way questionable about the relationship between Cannon and Hornaday to the Peak account,'' he said.
 
 Cannon sued Peak to get its money back, but the issue was resolved when Peak agreed to be absorbed by Cannon. Cannon is selling off Peak's assets to cut its losses.
 
 Mr. Stolz, 38 years old, who joined the company in 1977 as senior vice president and general counsel, outlines a view of the future that looks decidedly better than the present. ''Cannon is a very strong company,'' he said. ''I think the third quarter was a temporary aberration, not the start of any trend.'' While Mr. Stolz declined to make earnings predictions, he said, ''We do not expect any more losses.''
 
 One analyst takes Cannon to task for failing to buy sufficient supplies of cotton this summer when the price was 75 cents a pound.  But Mr. Stolz maintains that ''nobody bought enough cotton when it was 65 cents a pound.'' (Cotton was as low as 65 cents a pound last year. Today it is 93 cents a pound.) He adds that a soft sales market is preventing manufacturers from recouping the higher cotton costs.
 
 For the long run, Cannon faces an organizing fight on the labor front. The Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers union assigned organizers to the company this spring. The union lost an organizing battle with Cannon in 1974. Though the union publicly describes Cannon only as a target, a high-level union source has called the company the union's ''principal organizing target.''
 
 Cannon clearly wants none of that, and Mr. Stoltz said as much in a company newsletter for employees. ''The company's position is that it does not want unionization and that unionization in this particularly difficult economic time would lead to lower productivity and less flexibility to meet the company's challenges.''


FACTORY WORKERS (90%); TEXTILES (90%); COMPANY LOSSES (90%); RECESSION (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); GARMENT WORKERS (90%); HOUSEHOLD LINEN MILLS (90%); BUSINESS FORECASTS (90%); TEXTILE MFG (89%); INTERIM FINANCIAL RESULTS (89%); FABRIC MILLS (89%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (89%); RESIGNATIONS (88%); BUSINESS FINANCIAL TROUBLE (78%); CORPORATE DEBT (78%); HOLDING COMPANIES (78%); BOARDS OF DIRECTORS (78%); COMPANY EARNINGS (78%); ANNUAL FINANCIAL RESULTS (77%); INTERVIEWS (74%); INVESTIGATIONS (74%); TAXES & TAXATION (72%); LABOR UNIONS (68%); 
