3S8G-CHC0-000B-Y2X6


The New York Times


OHIO FACING FISCAL CRISIS AND RISE IN TAXES


19801207T000000Z


The recession is putting an end to Ohio's long love affair with low taxes. With six more months to run in the current budget, the state is facing a $353 million deficit, all a result of the long slump in the state's economy.
 
 Tax receipts are trailing off, welfare rolls are sharply rising, school districts are running out of money, and across the state the ratio of municipal debt to cash on hand, a reliable sign of municipal health, stands at four times the national average.
 
 ''It's the worst fiscal crisis in the history of Ohio,'' said State Senator Paul Gillmor, a Republican who will be the State Senate majority leader when the new session convenes Jan. 5. ''Even adjusted for inflation, there's never been a time to my knowledge when we've had a deficit situation anywhere near this magnitude.''
 
 Senator Gillmor and his fellow legislators are engrossed in figuring the alternatives for a solution, a pasttime that has obsessed this state capital ever since Gov. James A. Rhodes stepped off his plane from China last week and announced that Ohio had a problem. Explanation of the Damage
 
 William A. Keip, the State Finance Director, explained the extent of the damage to the books of a state whose Constitution forbids year-end deficits: a $250 million revenue shortage, made up of a $90 million loss in sales taxes; a $75 million shortage in personal income taxes, a 10 percent drop in corporate franchise taxes worth $62 million, a $25 million loss in utility excise taxes - all a result of the slump in the state's economy.
 
 On top of the tax losses, welfare case-loads are soaring as more and more people are forced out of work. Caseloads in the program of Aid to Families with Dependent Children were planned at $500,000 a month but are running $60,000 above that and are still climbing, and the state is being forced to add $110 million more to its welfare budget, almost 20 percent of the original amount budgeted, to care for these new victims of the recession.
 
 The state is also being forced to add $45 million to its reserve fund to help school districts in financial trouble. More than a dozen school districts are already under some form of state receivership from bankruptcy, and the additional appropriation is an admission that the number will rise.
 
 Moreover, the deficit has come on top of a $266 million budget shortage discovered earlier this year and dealt with by two 3 percent across-the-board cuts that spared only welfare and elementary and secondary education. Unusual Rhodes Position
 
 The state's fiscal problem has forced Governor Rhodes into the unfamiliar position of warning that new taxes will be needed or drastic cuts in state responsibility will result, cuts that would put 6,000 convicted felons on the street, he warned, and end welfare payments to tens of thousands of needy people while drastically reducing the state payroll.
 
 Calling for new taxes is unusual for the Governor because Mr.  Rhodes, who has held the office for 14 of the last 18 years, has consistentl y championed a ''no new taxes'' policy that has left Ohio with the lowe st per capita tax payments of any state in the nation.  State taxes h ave not been raised in nine years, when the income tax was institute d with an average burden of around 1 percent, less than the rate impo sed by many large cities with income taxes.
 
 In the last decade, the State Legislature has further reduced tax burdens by eliminating all personal property taxes, reducing the rate on commercial inventories and equipment and assigning 10 percent of all private real estate taxes to the state.
 
 Meanwhile, only half of the new school tax levies on last November's ballots were approved, while in the state's largest cities only two school tax increases have been passed by the voters in the last 12 years. A tax reform referendum designed to increase upper income and corporate taxes on the November ballot was crushed at the polls, even though the proposed new taxes would have left most people unaffected directly.
 
 A general agreement has been reached, from Mr. Rhodes on down, that the state will need new taxes and will probably increase the state sales tax from 4 to 5 percent.
 
 But political considerations are preventing swift action. Mr.  Rhodes has been demanding that the Legislature act before its current session expires with the new year. The Democrats lost control of the State Senate in November and saw their margin in the Assembly reduced, so they prefer to wait until Jan. 5, when the new legislative session begins, to let the new Republican majority in the State Senate share the political liability.


ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); BUDGET DEFICITS (90%); RECESSION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); BUDGETS (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); TAXES & TAXATION (90%); BUDGET CUTS (89%); TAX LAW (89%); SCHOOL DISTRICTS (89%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (89%); BUSINESS FINANCIAL TROUBLE (78%); EXCISE TAX (78%); SALES TAX (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); APPROPRIATIONS (78%); SCHOOL BUDGETS (78%); INSOLVENCY & BANKRUPTCY (77%); CHILDREN (77%); PUBLIC DEBT (77%); FAMILY (77%); GOVERNORS (77%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY EDUCATION (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (74%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (73%); PUBLIC FINANCE (73%); CORPORATE TAX (73%); BUSINESS INSOLVENCY & BANKRUPTCY (69%); FELONIES (60%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (50%); INCOME TAX (50%); 
