3S8G-CK70-000B-Y2D8


The New York Times


BUYING SURGE IS CALLED POSSIBLE BEFORE RISE IN CEILING ON INTEREST


19801124T000000Z


The new banking law adopted by the New York Legislature, which is expected to result in sharply higher consumer interest rates, could create a buying surge if individuals decide to draw on their unused credit lines before the higher rates take effect, according to leading bankers.
 
 Individuals have about $7 billion in readily available credit from New York banks, according to an estimate made yesterday by a leading banker. And total consumer buying power is substantially larger if lines of credit available from retail stores and other consumer lenders are taken into account.
 
 ''If everybody goes out and starts buying with their credit cards, it could mean a big boost for the economy,'' said Charles E. Long, senior vice president of Citicorp, the corporate parent of Citibank.
 
 Under the legislation, which Governor Carey is expected to sign by tomorrow, all loans made until the effective date of the new banking law will remain subject to existing usury ceilings.
 
 The effective date for installment loans, which have specific maturity dates and payment schedules, is Dec. 1. This would include automobile loans and installment purchases of all types of consumer goods. Jan. 1 Date for Credit Cards
 
 The effective date for credit-card loans and other loans against previously granted lines of credit is Jan. 1. Any credit card or line of credit newly obtained on or after Jan. 1 would not be subject to the old usury laws.
 
 Higher rates could not take effect on existing credit cards or lines of credit before Jan. 31. The new law requires that lenders give their customers 30 days' notice before increasing interest rates. And even then the new rates would not become effective until the consumer actually used his credit card or drew on his line of credit. So if a bank sent a notice on Jan. 1 of an increase in interest rates, the earliest it possibly could become effective would be Jan. 31.
 
 At present, New York usury laws allow lenders to charge up to 18 percent on credit-card balances of up to $500 and up to 12 percent on any amount above that. The ceiling on cash advances against credit cards is 12 percent. Under the new law, banks will be able to set rates in line with general in terest rate leve ls. In California, wherethere are no usury laws, rates on consumer lo ans currently range between 16 and 21 percent.
 
 Holders of credit cards issued by Citibank alone have about $2 billion in unused credit lines available to them, according to an estimate by Mr. Long of Citicorp. Estimates at Other Banks
 
 Customers of the Chase Manhattan Bank have about $1.2 billion in unused lines of credit, Frederick S. Hammer, executive vice president, said yesterday.
 
 Edward D. Miller, senior vice president of the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company, estimated yesterday that his bank's customers have about $350 million in unused credit lines available.
 
 While the economy might experience a short-term bonanza as a result of the change in the banking laws, it is expected to take at least half a year before the banks themselves start reaping benefits from the new legislation.
 
 Last April, after the Federal Reserve Board imposed credit restraints on the nation's economy, Citicorp placed a $300 limit on cash advances against its credit cards. ''We have the ability to find out if people are irresponsibly drawing cash against their credit cards and we can stop them,'' Mr. Long said. But he indicated Citicorp would not act against purchases made against its cards.
 
 Mr. Long predicted that the degree to which individuals will use their available credit lines will depend heavily on their confidence in the economy. But, he added, ''We don't have enough market experience to project what might happen,'' he said. April Situation Recalled
 
 Mr. Hammer said yesterday that the only comparable experience that his bank had was immediately after credit controls were imposed last April. ''We had an abrupt run-up in drawings on credit lines, but it wasn't outlandish,'' Mr. Hammer said.
 
 Mr. Hammer said that, for ''public policy'' reasons, Chase would move slowly in raising its interest rates. He predicted that initially the bank would charge 18 percent on all credit-card loans.  He said that on the basis of what Chase currently is paying for its own money, almost 17 percent, the bank would have to charge creditcard borrowers 24 percent if Chase were to break even. The difference is accounted for by the overhead involved in the cr editcard bu siness, he said.
 
 Mr. Long estimated that it would take 12 to 18 months before Citicorp began feeling the full effects of the changes. The most important immediate effect of the new law on Citicorp, Mr. Long said, is that ''it says we can have a viable business.''
 
 Analysts estimate that Citicorp has been losing about $350,000 a day, or more than $100 million a year, on its credit-card activities.


UNITED STATES ECONOMY; CREDIT; CREDIT CARDS AND ACCOUNTS; CONSUMER BEHAVIOR; INTEREST (MONEY)  BANKING & FINANCE (94%); BANKING LAW (93%); INTEREST RATES (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); BANKING & FINANCE REGULATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); LEGISLATION (89%); EXECUTIVES (88%); CONSUMER LENDING (78%); PARENT COMPANIES (75%); CONSUMER BEHAVIOR (73%); RETAILERS (73%); 
