3S8G-CHX0-000B-Y46H


The New York Times


CHRYSLER PROFIT HOPE DASHED 3)


19801205T000000Z


Lee A. Iacocca, chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, conceded today that soaring interest rates had scuttled the company's hopes for a fourth-quarter profit and said the company must present a scaled-down recovery plan to the United States Chrysler Loan Guarantee Board.
 
 Characterizing the Federal Reserve Board's money supply policies as ''madness,'' Mr. Iacocca said the resulting prime rate, now at 18 1/2 percent, had ''laid the blocks to all of Detroit'' and was responsible f or a reversal in Chrysler's fortunes.
 
 Chrysler will amend its financial and operating plan to the Federal loan board tomorrow or Monday and cut about $500 million from its capital spending plans for 1981-85, leaving the total spending around $9 billion, Mr. Iacocca said.
 
 A company official said the likely victim of the cutback would be a new front-wheel-drive transaxle planned for 1984. There will be no change in the company's basic plan for new cars and trucks, he said.
 
 In attacking the Fed's restrictions on the money supply, Mr.  Iacocca announced a rebate program on nearly all Chrysler's Americanbuilt cars. It will provide a cash payment for buyers that will rise or fall with the prime rate. The program, Chrysler's second rebate in the two-month-old 1981-model year, will provide a percentage cut on the sticker price of cars equal to the difference between 12 1/2 percent and the prime rate. At the current prime rate of 18 1/2 percent, buyers would get a 6 percent price cut, or $360 on a $6,000 car. Attention-Getter
 
 The rebate plan appeared at least partly intended to attract attention to the prime rate as a cause of the auto industry's problems.
 
 Chrysler has clung to gradually dwindling hopes of a profit in the current quarter. Late this summer, the company was forecasting profits as high as $250 million for the October-December period, in contrast to losses of $1.4 billion in the first nine months of this year.But Mr. Iacocca conceded today that, assuming continued high in terest rates, Chrysler would do ''several hundred million'' do llars worse than forecast. He said he could not be more specific.
 
 Mr. Iacocca said the worsening economic developments would force Chrysler to file yet another recovery plan with the loan board, which administers the $1.5 billion Chrysler loan guarantee program that Congress approved last December. Earlier cutbacks in the spending, forced by slumping car and truck sales, in effect forced Chrysler to become less than a full-line producer of cars and trucks in the future.
 
 At a news conference at Chrysler headquarters, Mr. Iacocca said Chrysler would also begin preparing an application for a third borrowing of ''a couple hundred million'' dollars in guaranteed loans early next year, which has been expected. Chrysler so far has taken $800 million, leaving $700 million available under the $1.5 billion of guarantees authorized by Congress.
 
 A Chrysler official said the request would probably be made before the new Reagan administration took office on Jan. 20, if for no other reason than that the current loan board staff was familiar with the mechanics of processing the application and the loan could be received sooner. In Washington, Administration officials indicated that, though they would be happy to leave the matter to the Reagan team, they expected pressure for approval before the inauguration.
 
 One Government official has called the next Chrysler aid request a ''day of reckoning'' for the company, because the Chrysler loan board must reassess the auto company's prospects and satisfy several legal points set out in the loan guarantee law before it can lend more money. With Chrysler's worsening outlook, the board's action is an open question. Reagan Team's Stance
 
 The loan board's response is also clouded by the question of the new Reagan administration's stance on Chrysler aid. Mr. Reagan's new Treasury Secretary will also be chairman of the loan board. One apparent front-runner for that job, Citibank's chairman, Walter B.  Wriston, testified against the Chrysler bailout legislation last year before the Senate Banking Committee. Citibank is one of Chrysler's lenders.
 
 In response to a question, Mr. Iacocca said today that if Mr.  Wriston became Treasury Secretary, he should disqualify himself from sitting on the loan board ''because we owe his bank so much money, not because he is philosophically opposed'' to the loan guarantees.
 
 Current loan board officials had no comment on Mr. Iacocca's statements.  In attacking the policies of the Federal Reserve Board, the Chrysler chairman was in effect criticizing the Fed's chairman, Paul A. Volcker, who is one of three voting members of the Chrysler loan board.
 
 United States auto sales have been edging up slowly from a low in May, when sales were at a 5.2 million annual rate. By October and early November, the annualized sales rate was in the 6.6 million range, still weak but on an upward trend. In the final 10 days of November, however, sales plunged back to the 5.2 million rate of May.
 
 Mr. Iacocca attrributed the slump to the prime rate, which surpassed the 15 percent mark early in November. Car de alers, who typically pay about two percentage points above the prime rate for the money the y borrow to buy cars from the factory, have cut back on their orders rather than pay interest on cars sitting on the showroomfloor.
 
 Chrysler was the only United States auto maker to show a year-toyear improvement in car sales in November, but that was in comparison to especially bleak sales last year. Sales of the allimportant new ''K'' cars, the Plymouth Reliant and Dodge Aries, fell below goals in both October and November.


INTERIM FINANCIAL RESULTS (90%); INTEREST RATES (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); COMPANY PROFITS (90%); PRIME RATES (90%); MOTOR VEHICLES (90%); SALES REBATES (89%); BUSINESS FORECASTS (89%); AUTOMOTIVE MFG (78%); AUTOMOTIVE SECTOR PERFORMANCE (78%); CENTRAL BANKS (78%); MONETARY POLICY (78%); AUTOMOTIVE SALES (78%); MONEY SUPPLY (77%); CAPITAL EXPENDITURES (74%); AUTOMAKERS (73%); AUTOMOBILE MFG (73%); APPROVALS (72%); PRICE CUTTING (71%); PRESS CONFERENCES (66%); 
