3S8G-CHV0-000B-Y42D


The New York Times


IN THE NATION;GIGO and the Budget


19801205T000000Z


Herbert Stein, the University of Virginia economist who played a leading role in the Nixon and Ford Administrations, has usefully reminded Ronald Reagan and his economic planners of that dangerous phenomenon that the computer wizards call GIGO - ''garbage in, garbage out.''
 
 Not that Mr. Stein accused the Reagan men of basing their economic plans on garbage; rather, in an article in The Wall Street Journal, he reminded them - and all the rest of us -that there's nothing hard and fast about economic projections. Like anything else that comes out of a computer, or the human brain, they're only as good as the assumptions on which they rest (all too often uneasily).
 
 And unfortunately, assumptions are only that - whether they come from an incoming or an outgoing President, one set of economists or another. Here, for example, is Herbert Stein's pointed example:
 
 The Reagan team is proceeding on assumptions - furnished by the Senate Budget Committee - that by 1985, Federal revenues will total $1,102 billion, Federal expenditures under programs presently recommended will reach $920 billion and that a Federal surplus of $182 billion will result.
 
 Viewing this pleasing prospect, the new Administration assumes a reduction in expenditures of $64 billion, derived from the elimination of waste and fraud and from tighter control of spending.  That would run the surplus up to $246 billion.
 
 But the Reaganites also assume -or so Mr. Stein assumes - the President-elect's promised 10 percent tax rate reduction in each of the next three calendar years. They assume this will result in economic growth that will add $39 billion in revenues, increasing that projected 1985 surplus still further to $285 billion. But wait - cutting the tax rates by a cumulative 30 percent also would result in reducing revenues by $192 billion; put in net terms the revenue loss would be $153 billion.
 
 Thus, starting from the Budget Committee assumptions and linking their own, the Reagan economists assume a 1985 surplus of $93 billion - a pretty predicament in which no Administration has found itself since the Mint discovered the printing press. Nor, dourly suggests Herbert Stein, is it a sure thing that the Reagan Administration will be so blessed.
 
 For one thing, the Budget Committee projections are substantially higher than the Treasury's, and both are basically value judgments.  For another thing, the committee assumed about an 8.7 percent rise in the price level each year until 1985; but if the new Administration or luck or fate or something should bring inflation below that level, both revenues and expenditures will drop - revenues the more, owing to progressive tax rates.
 
 The Budget Committee also assumed a 2.5 percent yearly average rise in real output until 1985, basing that figure on 1970's performance; and it assumed a 3.5 percent reduction from present levels in real non-defense spending, which may make it unrealistic for the Reagan men to assume they can cut $64 billion more. The committee also assumed a yearly increase in defense spending of about 5.7 percent until 1985.For all these reasons, Mr. Stein suggested, and ''on assumptions th at seem to me as reasonable as those made by the (committee) and th e Reagan economists, we could have a surplus before the tax cuts of$5 4 billion rather than $246 billion in 1985, even without providing fo r any increase of defense expenditures'' above the committee's pr ojections.
 
 Since Mr. Stein's alternatives assume less production, less inflation and less revenue to start with, they also assume that the revenue loss from the Reagan tax cuts would be smaller than the Reaganites' assumed net loss of $153 billion. Even so, using the Stein assumptions, the result of the Reagan tax cuts would be a $60-billion deficit, not a $93-billion surplus; and if what Mr. Stein thinks is a moderate increase in defense spending - l0 percent over the Budget Committee figure, which is alr eady a 5.7 percent annual increase - al so is assumed, the deficit would rise to about $90 billion, almo st the mirror opposite of the $93-billion surplus now assumed by th e Reagan men.
 
 Though he makes no great case of it, Mr. Stein obviously thinks his assumptions may be better than those of the President-elect's advisers. But that isn't the real point, since he makes it clear that reasonable men could assume either way. The point, says Mr.  Stein, is that the new Administration ought to be prepared for the possibility that ''all good things can't be done at once'' (assuming, of course, that everything the Reagan men want to do is a ''good thing'').
 
 As a practicing tea-leaf reader myself, I'd draw these further conclusions: Don't assume that economic projections, any more than public opinion polls, are gospel; and don't assume that the behavior of the economy, any more than that of the voting public, can be precisely predicted. It's safer to assume that the GIGO phenomenon may be at work.


EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); BUDGETS (90%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (89%); ECONOMIC NEWS (88%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (78%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); PUBLIC FINANCE (74%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (72%); TAX RELIEF (70%); PRICE INCREASES (63%); 
