3S8G-CH10-000B-Y1VY


The New York Times


BUSINESS DIGEST;THURSDAY, DECEMBER 11, 1980;The Economy


19801211T000000Z


Banks raised their prime lending rates one point, to 20 percent, as the key interest rate reached the record set last April after the President declared a national emergency to deal with inflation. The latest move raised warnings of ''dire'' consequences for the economy. Bankers predicted the prime would climb more. (Page D1.)
 
 President-elect Reagan was warned by two key advisers that his administration would face a ''grave economic crisis'' during its first two years in office. The aides charted an emergency program for economic stabilization and recovery to cope with the anticipated crisis. (A1.)
 
 Retail sales rose 1.6 percent last month, the Government said, displaying surprising resilience in the face of soaring interest rates. Private economists cautioned, however, that continuing interest rate increases would damp sales in coming months. (D1.)
 
 Businesses plan to increase capital spending by 2.5 percent during the first half of 1981, after adjustment for inflation, the Government said. But the forecast reflects business sentiment in October and November, when the prime rate was below 16 percent.  (D13.)Markets
 
 The Dow Jones industrial average plummeted 17.83 points, to 916.21, in a broad sell-off touched off by the increase in the prime rate.  Energy and precious metals issues were battered. Superior Oil dropped 13 1/4 points, to 198 1/4, losing its ranking as the highest-priced issue on the New York Stock Exchange. (D1.)
 
 Three-month Treasury bills rose above 17 percent, a record, as rising short-term rates again plunged credit markets into uncertainty. Long-term bond prices continued to slide. (D7.)
 
 Gold prices fell sharply and the dollar continued to gain under the influence of climbing United States interest rates. Gold slumped $26.50 in New York, closing at $567 an ounce at Republic National Bank. The dollar finished higher in New York against all major currencies except sterling. (D11.) It also rose above two marks in West Germany, a two-year high. (D3.)
 
 More regulation of trading in Government-backed securities was proposed, in a study compiled by three Federal agencies, because of alleged trading abuses, fraud and overspeculation. The study recommends that two new regulatory bodies be set up. (D1.) Companies
 
 Chrysler was offered $100 million from Mitsubishi Motors of Japan, a financial journal reported. Terms of the reported agreement call for Chrysler to permit the Japanese company to set up its own dealer network in this country. (D4.)
 
 Columbi a Pictures filed suit to block MGM G rand Hotels from holdingits annual meeting and to prevent it from pay ing dividends until the extent of MGM's liability from a Las Vegas ho tel fire is known. The suit was seen as another clash in the deepeni ng battle between Columbia and the financier Kirk Kerkorian, a large shareholder in both companies. (D2.)
 
 The battle to acquire Crouse-Hinds heated up when Cooper Industries said it had reached a definitive agreement to merge with Crouse in a stock transaction valued at about $723 million. Meanwhile, the Belden Corporation said its shareholders had approved a merger with Crouse.  (D5.)Energy
 
 Saudi Arabia's oil minister, Sheik Ahmed Zaki Yamani, said in an interview that he did not expect the 13 OPEC partners to unify prices at Monday's meeting. He also said that Saudi oil output had reached 10.3 million barrels a day, well above its current ''ceiling,'' and that future capacity could reach 12 million barrels. (D1.)
 
 The nation's first commercial synthetic fuels plant is threatened by a recent court decision, one of the project's main sponsors says.  Work on the Great Plains coal gasification project in North Dakota could be stopped ''within days'' as a result of a court decision overturning a crucial element in the project's financing. (D6.) Today's Columns
 
 Mixtures of coal and oil are being studied by electric utilities as a way to cut their reliance on expensive foreign oil without having to convert completely to coal-fired plants. Technology. (D2.) A major new institutional report on Merck projects that the drug company could be in for a period of disappointing growth - just when many investor s are looking for an earnings breakout. The controversial report, from Merrill Lynch, argues that Merck's aging product group is under severe competitive pressure from newer drugs. However, othe r analysts disagree. Market Place. (D8.)


ECONOMIC NEWS (92%); INTEREST RATES (92%); PRIME RATES (91%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); CURRENCIES (89%); BANKING & FINANCE (79%); US DOLLAR (79%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (79%); PRICE CHANGES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); SALES FIGURES (78%); STOCK INDEXES (78%); BONDS (78%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (77%); BUSINESS CLIMATE & CONDITIONS (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); CAPITAL EXPENDITURES (72%); GOLD MARKETS (72%); BOND MARKETS (71%); RETAIL SECTOR PERFORMANCE (70%); RETAIL SALES (69%); STOCK EXCHANGES (69%); BUSINESS CONFIDENCE (67%); SUITS & CLAIMS (67%); LITIGATION (64%); TREASURY SECURITIES (64%); 
