3S8G-CDY0-000B-Y1B3


The New York Times


PANEL ON NATIONAL GOALS PROPOSES U.S. AID FOR MIGRATION TO SUN BELT


19801227T000000Z


A Presidential commission drafting a ''national agenda'' for the coming decade says that instead of trying to stem the decline of older cities in the Northeast and Middle West, the Federal Government should encourage people to seek jobs and other economic opportunities in the Sun Belt states of the South and Southwest.
 
 In a draft of its final report, the 45-member President's Commission for a National Agenda for the Eighties recommends a ''long-range reorientation of Federal urban policy'' to assist the migration of people willing to follow employment opportunities.
 
 ''Contrary to conventional wisdom, cities are not permanent,'' said the commission, which is headed by William J. McGill, former president of Columbia University.
 
 ''Their strength is related to their ability to reflect change rather than to fend it off. Growth and decline are integral parts of the same dynamic process in urban life. When the Federal Government steps in to try to alter these dynamics, it generates a flood of demands that may sap the initiative of urban governments via the expectation of continuing support.''
 
 One of Many Topics
 
 Urban policy was only one topic covered in the panel's report, which had been scheduled to be made public next month. An embargo on disclosure of the report was broken with the publication today of key details in some newspapers.
 
 Many of the recommendations on urban policy were developed by a subcommittee headed by Charles E. Bishop, an economist who is president of the University of Houston, which is in the heart of the so-called Sun Belt. But inclusion of them in the final report indicates that they were endorsed by a majority of commission members and Mr. Bishop, reached today at his home in Houston, said that support for the proposals was ''rather unanimous.''
 
 For too long, Mr. Bishop said, the nation's urban policy has been ''place-oriented rather than people-oriented.'' 'Let the Market Function'
 
 ''The Federal Government,'' he said, ''has followed a policy of trying to keep people where they are. We are saying, 'You should let the market function and then assist people to adjust.'''
 
 The Northeast-Midwest Congressional Coalition, a bipartisan group of more than 200 members of Congress from 18 states, contends that many Federal policies already aid Sun Belt states, to the detriment of other regions. These policies, they say, include the distribution of military facilities and spending and the formulas used in computing Federal grants.
 
 Laurence Zabar, executive director of the Northeast Midwest Congressional Coalition, said tonight that the commission's urban policy proposals were ''dead wrong.'' He said the recommendations ran counter to ''everything the Carter Administration believed in and our coalition worked for.'' Coalition members, he said, are ''in complete disagreement with the idea that you just let older cities contract and die.'' The commission was established by President Carter on Oct. 24, 1979, as an outgrowth of the consultations he had held that summer with a wide range of national leaders.
 
 The panel's position on some issues coincides with that of President-elect Ronald Reagan, who has called for curtailment of Federal intervention in state affairs when possible.But in other areas, the commission recommended complete ''federalization'' of the welfare system, a guaranteed ''minimum security income for all Americans'' and a system of national health insurance that would provide all citizens with a flat subsidy for health insurance, by means of vouchers that would permit them to select from a variety of competing options. It also suggested increased emphasis on long-term economic growth, rather than ''fine tuning'' of the economy.
 
 New Yorkers have been in the forefront of state officials urging a takeover of welfare costs by the Federal Government. New York City and New York State have also received many benefits from other Federal grant-in-aid programs that the commission recommended transferring to state or local governments. More Public Funds for Politics
 
 In the realm of politics, the panel suggested a strengthening of the role of the major political parties, specifically urging that ''more public funds for political campaigns be funneled through the parties.''
 
 In place of what has been criticized as a bewildering sequence of state Presidential primaries, the commission recommended four regional primaries conducted over a period of four months.
 
 In its 197-page draft report, the commission said that ''the Federal Government has often shown itself to be an inefficient and inflexible administrator of the myriad grant-in-aid programs dispensed to state and local governments.''
 
 There are now more than 500 of these programs, ranging from highway construction to health care, and they are said to cost the Government more than $83 billion a year. The commission said that the Government should begin to turn over to state and local agencies more responsibility for these programs, and in those areas where the Federal Government retains control, it should consolidate narrow ''categorical'' grant programs.
 
 The commission opposed any reduction of the Federal role in enforcing civil rights. ''Weak civil rights laws need to be strengthened,'' it said, ''and statutes, such as the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which are due to expire in this decade must be extended.'' Supports Rights Amendment
 
 The panel also called for passage of legislation that guarantees equal access to housing, such as the bill that died in the last session of Congress. And it urged ratification of the proposed equal rights amendment, which would forbid discrimination on the basis of gender.
 
 The commission estimated the cost of its proposed comprehensive health insurance program at $14 billion a year, but predicted that some savings would result from a more efficient use of health care.
 
 Other than that, it did not explain how the country could meet the cost of new and expanded social service programs beyond emphasizing the value of economic growth.
 
 The commission said that the decline of cities in the ''old industrial heartland,'' running from New York and Pennsylvania to Ohio, Michigan and Illinois, was part of an inexorable process, ''the emergence of post-industrial urban America.''
 
 Mr. Bishop's subcommittee, in a companion report, said that ''the crises experienced by cities, although undesirable, are a normal concomitant of the functions that they perform for the larger society, rather than evidence of their decline and imminent 'death.'''
 
 ''A Federal policy of active anticipation, accommodation and adjustment makes more sense than efforts to retard or reverse'' these trends, the subcommittee said.
 
 Commission members include John W. Gardner, founder of Common Cause; Philip Handler, president of the National Academy of Sciences; Dorothy Height, president of the National Council of Negro Women; Ruth Hinerfeld, president of the League of Women Voters; M. Carl Holman, president of the National Urban Coalition; Benjamin L. Hooks, executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People; Matina S. Horner, president of Radcliffe College; Lane Kirkland, president of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations; William W. Scranton, former Governor of Pennsylvania, and Glenn Watts, president of the Communications Workers of America.


URBAN DEVELOPMENT (91%); ECONOMIC NEWS (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (87%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (76%); EMPLOYMENT (74%); EXECUTIVES (71%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (69%); GRANTS & GIFTS (50%); 
