3S8G-CG50-000B-Y4TT


The New York Times


PRODUCTION UP 1.4% IN NOVEMBER


19801217T000000Z


The nation's factories continued to expand production in November, the Federal Reserve Board reported today, despite rising interest rates and fears of a new recession.
 
 However, last month's 1.4 percent increase in output may be the last big jump for some time, economists caution. Auto production, up nearly 3 percent in November, should decline in December, Federal Reserve officials said, as car sales shrink and industry layoffs grow.
 
 Private economists, meanwhile, predict that industrial production will start to level off in December and will decline during the first three months of 1981. This will parallel an overall drop in the nation's economy, they said.
 
 The industrial expansion in November was ''large for most product and materials'' industries, the Federal Reserve said.  Autos were assembled at an annual rate of 6.9 million, up from 6.7 million in October, the Federal Reserve said.  In addition, industrial output earlier this fall proved stronger than first reported. Production in October increased 1.8 percent instead of the originally estimated 1.6 percent. September output rose 1.5 percent, compared with a preliminary figure of 1.3 percent.
 
 Production at American factories and mines has shown substantial strength since the depths of the recession late last spring. After six consecutive monthly declines, output has increased since August.
 
 Even with the recent rise, however, last month's output remained 2.5 percent below the level of November 1979, Federal Reserve officials said.
 
 The strong showing for production came in the wake of other favorable economic indicators: Retail sales in October rose 1.6 percent, unemployment in November dipped slightly to 7.5 percent and United States businesses continued to keep their inventories well under control.
 
 ''Indications are we have been fairly healthy,'' said Robert Gough, vice president of Data Resources Inc. But he warned that industrial production was lagging behind other economic signals, particularly housing and auto sales.
 
 Businessmen have kept a careful eye on their inventories because of the shaky economic recovery, Mr. Gough added, thus keeping production healthy and the unemployment rate stable.
 
 ''However, interest rates ultimately are going to slow production,'' said Mr. Gough, who predicts a 2.6 percent decline in industrial output for the first quarter of 1981 and a 1.6 percent decline for the second quarter.
 
 The Federal Reserve's November report also showed these changes:
 
 - Output of all consumer goods rose eight-tenths of 1 percent, compared with a 1.6 percent increase in October.
 
 - Production of home goods increased eight-tenths of 1 percent, less than in any of the preceding three months.
 
 - Output of consumer nondurable goods went up six-tenths of 1 percent, after rising a combined five-tenths of 1 percent in the two previous months.
 
 - Equipment production increased nine-tenths of 1 percent, compared with a rise of seven-tenths of 1 percent in October.
 
 - Production of construction supplies jumped 2 percent, slightly higher than the month before.
 
 - Output of intermediate goods rose 1 percent, after climbing a combined 2.5 percent during the previous two months.  All these figures are adjusted for seasonal variations.


ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); MANUFACTURING OUTPUT (90%); RECESSION (90%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (90%); CENTRAL BANKS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); INTEREST RATES (89%); AUTOMOTIVE SALES (89%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (89%); MINING OUTPUT (89%); ECONOMIC SURVEYS (78%); AUTOMOTIVE MFG (78%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (78%); ECONOMIC RECOVERY (78%); STATISTICS (78%); ECONOMIC INDICATORS (78%); LAYOFFS (73%); RETAIL SECTOR PERFORMANCE (72%); RETAIL SALES (71%); 
