3S8G-CK60-000B-Y2BR


The New York Times


CREDIT AT RETAILERS LIKELY TO COST MORE


19801125T000000Z


Retailers in New York City and State are expected to raise interest rates on their own charge and installment accounts early in the new year following the passage of state legislation over the weekend removing interest-rate ceilings, according to retail trade sources.  But the higher charges will be put into eff ect gradually, the sources said, based on competitive moves and on the trend in the bankprime lending rate.
 
 In a study conducted yesterday by the Metropolitan New York Retail Merchants Association, major retailers indicated that their most likely first step would be to raise the basic cutoff point of 18 percent on the first $500 balance to 18 percent on the first $1,000 of credit balance.
 
 The present New York usury law, which will not be extended beyond the end of the year, gives lenders an 18 percent interest-rate ceiling on balances up to $500 and a 12 percent ceiling on higher amounts. Competition Called Big Influence
 
 ''Most merchants think it will take from 30 to 90 days to decide on policy and to implement it,'' said Brian Sharoff, executive vice president of the New York merchants group, which represents major retailers in the area. ''Competition will be the major influence on policy decisions.
 
 Other retailers with many small credit accounts indicated that they might be interested in increasing the interest charge from the basic 18 percent to equalize the credit cost with that of their larger accounts, Mr. Sharoff said. ''It costs as much to process a $75 balance as a $300 balance,'' he added.
 
 At this early stage, however, the situation is very tentative, he asserted, with almost all retailers participating in the survey concentrating on studying the legislation.
 
 ''The general feeling is that much will depend upon the prime lending rate since many retailers pay the prime plus some extra points for their receivables,'' Mr. Sharoff said. ''If the prime continues to go up, there will be further pressure under the new law to push interest rates up. If it goes down, the new law won't have as much effect.'' Caution Is Expected
 
 In Albany, Kirby Hannan, executive director of the New York State Council of Retail Merchants, observed:
 
 ''Retailers around the state will be very cautious on how they operate under the new law. I don't think they will raise interest rates immediately. After all, the J.C. Penney Company, which operates in many states, could have raised its rates in states where the usury law was higher than in this one, but it didn't.''
 
 But, he added: ''I don't think that they can dally too long.  Competitive forces will cause lots of retailers to take action and also will dictate the changes in the marketplace.'' The Albany-based group represents some 2,000 retailers throughout the state.
 
 One of the possibilities raised by the new law is that retailers will now be allowed to set an annual fee for their own chargeaccount cards to their customers, as a number of banks outside the state did earlier this year when Federal credit controls were enacted. New York State banks and retailers were precluded from setting membership fees on their credit cards but can do so under the new legislation.
 
 Retailers in the state account for about 50 percent of all of the ''open-end'' credit volume transacted in the state, he said.


LAW AND LEGISLATION; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; RETAIL STORES AND TRADE; CREDIT CARDS AND ACCOUNTS; INTEREST (MONEY)  ECONOMIC NEWS (94%); INTEREST RATES (94%); RETAILERS (94%); ECONOMIC POLICY (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); RETAIL TRADE FIGURES (79%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); PRIME RATES (78%); TRENDS (77%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (72%); POLLS & SURVEYS (71%); ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE (69%); POLITICS (66%); 
