3S8G-CFF0-000B-Y2V3


The New York Times


PROSPECTS


19801221T000000Z


Quality for Christmas
 
 If recent trends are any indication, there will be fewer packages around Christmas trees this year.  Most Christmas shopping gets done during the last two weeks. Since the period between Thanksgiving and Christmas is five days shorter this year than last, a sudden surge could occur this week. However, it seems the fourth quarter will not be terribly robust. Over all, sales are not expected to rise more than 5 to 6 percent.
 
 High interest rates and overall economic conditions are making consumers shop selectively. The decision to opt for quality, not quantity, should depress volumes. If unit levels remain low, retailers may endanger gross margins and profits further by cutting prices.
 
 A disappointing Christmas performance marks the end of a generally bleak year for retailers. And a recent poll of major retailers showed they don't expect sales to improve until August.The Fed's Foreign Reach
 
 Americans are not alone in bemoaning the effect of high interest rates in the United States.  Countries with high inflation rates - Britain, Italy, and France, for instance - require, like the United States, a stringent monetary policy, and are not unduly hampered by the Fed's actions.
 
 However, in key countries like West Germany and Japan, where inflation is substantially lower than in the United States, the Fed's actions may be prohibiting economic expansion.
 
 An interest rate downturn around the world is not expected until sometime after the Fed eases up here at home. Some central banks may keep rates high in order to recoup foreign exchange losses against the dollar. Others may wait to gauge the Fed's long-range intentions. In either case, the longer monetary policy remains tight in the United States, the longer economic recovery elsewhere could be postponed.New Jersey Takes a Gamble
 
 The Bally Corporation is awaiting a decision on whether it will be licensed to operate its Atlantic City casino. The Casino Control Commission's decision, which may come next week, could affect the industry's future growth in New Jersey.
 
 Many analysts feel heavy regulation - not market saturation - is the major impediment to further casino construction. Two new houses have recently opened, bringing the total to six. Gross profits for their four predecessors are expected to exceed $600 million this year, up nearly 50 percent. In 1981, winnings for all six could come close to $1 billion.
 
 If Bally's license is denied, companies with interests in three additional casinos scheduled to open next year may view the decision as unwarranted, and delay or cancel their plans. High labor costs, inadequate transportation facilities, and the possibility of legislation legalizing gambling in New York state could be additional factors affecting a decision to reconsider. However, the smart money says the commission's decision will be favorable.Underwriters' Losses Rise
 
 After a highly profitable 1978, when investment and underwriting income posted healthy gains, property and casualty insurance companies have been on the down leg of their roller coaster.
 
 Investment income - which generates about 90 percent of total earnings - has remained high, and could reach $11 billion this year.  But underwriting policy rates have not kept pace with rising claim costs, and losses on property and casualty insurance could reach $3 billion.
 
 Analysts say the longer rate increases stay below claim costs, pressure on company cash positions grows, threatening investment portfolios. And, if interest rates head - and stay - down, as many economists expect, investment income could be cut further.
 
 Few analysts expect a repetition of the industry's 1973-1974 downturn, when over 40 percent of the industry was technically insolvent. Nevertheless, most agree the next two years will be rocky ones for many companies.


CHRISTMAS (93%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); INTEREST RATES (90%); RETAILERS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); INFLATION (90%); ECONOMIC POLICY (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); MONETARY POLICY (89%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (89%); COMPANY PROFITS (89%); TRENDS (89%); BANKING & FINANCE (87%); CASINOS (87%); DECRIMINALIZATION (86%); THANKSGIVING (78%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (77%); ECONOMIC RECOVERY (77%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (76%); COMPANY LOSSES (76%); CENTRAL BANKS (76%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (76%); INSURANCE SECTOR PERFORMANCE (76%); SALES PROJECTIONS (76%); INSURANCE (73%); INSURANCE UNDERWRITING (71%); PROPERTY & CASUALTY INSURANCE (71%); PRICE CUTTING (69%); LICENSES & PERMITS (62%); 
