3S8G-CF70-000B-Y27R


The New York Times


CHASE CUTS ITS PRIME TO 20 1 2%


19801224T000000Z


The Chase Manhattan Bank and several smaller banks reduced their prime lending rates yesterday by a full percentage point, to 20 1/2 percent, from the record 21 1/2 percent peak set only last Friday.
 
 Although other interest rates rose slightly yesterday after several days of sharp declines, some analysts maintained that interest rates had probably stopped climbing, at least for a few months. Most of them cautioned, however, that rates were likely to remain volatile in the months ahead.
 
 ''I think interest rates have peaked for now,'' said Albert M.  Wojnilower, a managing director and chief economist at the First Boston Corporation. But, he added, ''I would not be surprised to see these peaks exceeded more than once next year, and even more than once in the next six months.''
 
 Wells Fargo Led the Way
 
 The move to a lower prime began on Monday, when the Wells Fargo Bank of San Francisco cut the interest rate for its best corporate customers to 20 1/2 percent from 21 percent.
 
 The Federal Reserve Board is widely viewed as the director in the interest-rate drama that has taken so many twists and turns in recent months. Each time the Fed reacts to money supply figures and other economic data by making credit either more or less available, it sends interest rates flying in one direction or the other.
 
 But last week, analysts say, although the Fed gave no sign that it was relaxing its upward pressure on interest rates, the market began anticipate an easing. ''The turn in rates was largely psychological,'' said Gary Wenglowski, a partner and economist at Goldman, Sachs & Company. ''Everyone has wanted to be positioned for the moves in rates.''
 
 ''The credit markets are behaving very much like the foreign exchange markets did two years ago (when the dollar plunged relative to most foreign currencies),'' said Leif H. Olsen, chairman of the economic policy committee at Citibank. ''They are pricing on the basis of very short-term assessments of monetary policy and economic conditions. Supply and demand for credit is playing less of a role than those expectations.'' Factors in Rate Move
 
 According to analysts, several factors set off the big change in the market in the last few days:
 
 - The money supply declined for a second consecutive week, bringing the growth rate for the last four weeks to about 3 percent on an annual basis, well below the Fed's target. Some traders reasoned that the Fed had finally won its battle to hold down the money supply, with rates to fall as a result.
 
 - Top Reagan administration aides said last week that they would hold down Federal spending. That lessened concerns on Wall Street that tax cuts might set off a new round of inflation.
 
 - The sharp rise in rates touched off fears that the noose of high interest rates would choke off the economic recovery. Talk of another possible recession brought with it expectations of a weakerthan-anticipated economy and falling interest rates.
 
 The result was a swift turn in rates. They fell sharply Friday and then again on Monday as yields on new Treasury bills plummeted from the level reached a week earlier. Bankers said that, with the cost of short-term money falling, it was possible to reduce their own rates.
 
 ''We like to see interest rates go down because it is much better for us and for the economy,'' said Leonard Weil, president of the Manufacturers Bank in Los Angeles, which cut its prime rate to 20 1/2 percent yesterday.
 
 Of course, there were still cautions that all of the expectations might not be fulfilled. Fed watchers say, for example, that its market actions yesterday seemed to indicate it was not yet ready for rates to tumble. Caution on Market Assessment
 
 Furthermore, as Mr. Olsen of Citibank pointed out: ''The market's assessment is based on only four weeks of money supply data, and that's a very short time. The data could still turn again, and that would cause interest rates to turn and rise, too,''
 
 Whether interest rates steady or resume their breathtaking rise, economists said, will play a key role in determining whether the economy continues to grow or sinks back into a recession.
 
 ''If the Fed backs off at this point, we will get a sluggish first quarter but no decline in economic activity,'' Mr. Wenglowski of Goldman said. But, he added, ''If rates remain high through January, we will probably get a real decline in the economy.''
 
 The first few months under the new administration could also be important in setting the future course of rates.  ''The real test is what proposals and actions are going to come forth once the Reagan administration is in place,'' said Mark H.  Willes, executive vice president and chief financial officer at General Mills and a former president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
 
 ''Then we could see rates really start to decline, as we did earlier this year. Or, if the new administration paid more attention to tax cuts than to Federal spending, we could see interest rates go higher.''


ECONOMIC NEWS (94%); INTEREST RATES (94%); COMMERCIAL BANKING (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); PRIME RATES (90%); ECONOMIC POLICY (89%); MONEY SUPPLY (89%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (87%); PUBLIC POLICY (87%); CENTRAL BANKS (78%); MONETARY POLICY (77%); ECONOMIC INDICATORS (77%); PUBLIC FINANCE (77%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (77%); EXECUTIVES (75%); CURRENCIES (67%); 
