3S8G-CHY0-000B-Y4CB


The New York Times


MAYORS SEE HOPE ON REAGAN PROGRAMS


19801204T000000Z


Although mayors attending the National League of Cities convention here appear resigned to the prospect of some deep cuts in Federal assistance, even the most conservative ones say that an array of urban programs may be politically immune to elimination or drastic cuts under the incoming Reagan administration.
 
 The reasons most often given for this immunity are that some of the programs were creatures of the last Republican Administration, while others fit the conservative Republican philosophy of deeply involving the business community in efforts to revitalize the central cities, and conservatives closely tied to business interests are expected to lobby for their continuance.
 
 One of the proposals made a few days ago by the Reagan transition team, to withhold Federal funds from cities that have rent controls, was described as ludicrous here by conservatives close to Mr. Reagan.
 
 Mayor William H. Hudnut 3d of Indianapolis, a Republican conservative who was elected president of the league today at the close of the four-day convention, said such a proposal was ''big brotherism'' that ran counter to Mr. Reagan's belief that the Federal Government should refrain from interfering in local affairs.
 
 The proposal was dismissed by several city officials as one that was not being taken seriously even among close advisers to Mr.  Reagan. They said that it was largely the idea of one Mayor, Pete Wilson of San Diego, head of Mr. Reagan's urban affairs task force, and was not likely to be one of Mr. Reagan's proposals. Mayor Wilson did not attend the convention. Urban Development Grants
 
 One of President Carter's initiatives, urban development action grants, a $675-million-a-year program for distressed areas, was described as so attuned to the Reagan philosophy that it would be politically difficult for the new administration to dismantle it.
 
 Under that program, Federal money is used to attract private investment, and large hotel chains, among other interests, have been subsidized to lure inve stments in the central cities. Both liberal and conservative mayors like it.
 
 Some urban programs have been reshaped in the Carter Administration to favor private, rather than public, investment and thus have been made more compatible to a Republican administration. One of these is the Economic Development Administration, which also relies heavily on attracting private capital in both rural and urban areas. Mayor Hudnut has made wide use of that program in Indianapolis and is seeking to re tain it as a part of an overall Reagan plan for private redevelopment efforts.
 
 When the new administration looks at a number of other programs, the mayors say, it will find them difficult to dismantle because they were fashioned by Republicans in the Nixon and Ford Administrations. These are the block grant programs that give local officials broad discretion on how the funds are used. One is community development block grants, a $4 billion program, which cities can use as they wish for such diverse purposes as social programs and capital investment. Promise on Bloc Programs
 
 Mr. Reagan has promised to create more block programs, through consolidation of some limited-purpose programs, and it is not considered likely that he would move against those on the books, at least not early in his administration.
 
 Even the large jobs program under the Concentrated Employment and Training Act, which peaked at $10 billion under the Carter Administration in 1978, has a chance of survival in some form, the mayors believe. The Reagan people are talking of revising the CETA program so that more jobs would be subsidized in the private sector and fewer in the public sector.
 
 The programs most likely to be dismantled, the mayors believe, are those providing housing subsidies for the poor, crime control and a whole array of small, limited-purpose programs that the mayors want traded in for revenue-sharing or block grants that would give them more freedom in use of the money.
 
 Much of the convention involved a convergence of the mayors' and Mr. Reagan's ideas on emerging urban policy. In several sessions, the officials complained at length about Federal mandates, which the local governments find burdensome in several areas and which Mr.  Reagan has promised to reduce. There were long discussions about the Reagan ''enterprise zone'' approach to revitalizing depressed neighborhoods by offering businesses a reduction in taxes and regulation for operating in such areas.League Becomes Lobby
 
 The League of Cities, in fact, has become a lobby in which such ideas flourish. It represents not only the mayors but also council members of 800 cities and is an organization that conservatives find more attractive than the other large urban group, the United States Conference of Mayors.
 
 Some of the mayors of the larger cities - New York, Chicago and San Francisco, for example - would not participate in this convention and are more active in the conference, which they say provides a better platform for the big urban centers. The league, while representing cities of all sizes, is more attuned to small and suburban cities.
 
 Republican city officials, even though they are still far outnumbered by Democrats within the league, are gaining more of a voice in the urban lobby. At a caucus here, the Republican officials endorsed an urban policy conforming to Mr. Reagan's campaign promises.
 
 ''When all is said and done,'' said Mayor Dick Carver of Peoria, Ill., who was elected chairman of the National Conference of Republican Mayors, ''I believe President Reagan will be seen as a great friend of the cities precisely because he knows what our urban centers need: a stronger economy, more private-sector jobs and less Government interference.''


CONSERVATISM (91%); CITIES (91%); CITY LIFE (90%); URBAN DEVELOPMENT (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (90%); GRANTS & GIFTS (88%); LIBERALISM (78%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); POLITICAL PARTY CONVENTIONS (78%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (75%); LOBBYING (58%); RENT CONTROL (54%); HOTEL CHAINS (50%); HOTELS & MOTELS (50%); 
