3S8G-CF30-000B-Y1RK


The New York Times


HUNGARY'S CURRENCY STRATEGY


19801226T000000Z


As inflation or political unrest drive some countries to the brink of economic ruin, Hungary is flourishing to the point where its Communist Government is taking steps to make the forint, the national currency, convertible in Western money markets.
 
 Given Hungary's close economic ties with the Soviet Union and other East European countries and because no Soviet-bloc country has ever had a convertible currency, the project seems like something less that socialist reality.
 
 Hungary is not the first Eastern European country to contemplate convertibility. Rumanian economists were talking about it three years ago, even though Rumania's economy is far less developed than that of Hungary, or East Germany.
 
 Nevertheless, the Budapest Government has announced its hopes of attaining a convertible currency. In an interview in his office here, Jozsef Marjai, Deputy Prime Minister in charge of the economy, said the country is planning to take the first monetary steps as early as next year.
 
 ''We'll have a convertible currency, God knows when,'' Mr. Marjai said, pausing to sip a strong local brandy from a crystal snifter.  ''In 1981, I believe, we will take the first step - a unified rate of exchange. Soon after, in 1982, partial convertibility will be introduced. Since we would be the first, we will still have to find out how to do it.''
 
 Mr. Marjai is described by both Hungarian observers and foreign diplomats as a driving force behind many of Hungary's economic developments. He is a small but robust man with sandy hair, who was characterized by a Foreign Ministry official, Miklos Revesz, as ''blunt to the point of rudeness,'' an exception to the Hungarian rule of extreme politeness.
 
 Mr. Marjai, who has helped form Hungary's economic policy for the last 30 years, even when he served briefly as ambassador to Moscow, said the convertibility project was possible mainly because world market prices were gradually being introduced here for domestic products. Another factor, he said, was that Hungary has at last achieved standards of agricultural productivity that approach those of the United States.
 
 ''Indicators show we can tolerate any international comparison in farm output - American or any other,'' he said. ''We have quite significant exports. Our grain production amounts to 1.35 tons per capita in a country of 10 million. Our meat output is 140 kilos per capita.''
 
 Hungary's new pricing system was introduced earlier this year.  ''The entire small retail trade prices were raised 14 percent, bringing them close to world market levels,'' Mr. Marjai explained.  Having increased consumer prices, he said, higher producer prices would follow.
 
 ''In the competitive sphere, world prices are being used, and gradually we will extend it to the noncompetitive sphere - that is, to the domestic market. We still don't sell prefab housing elements on the world market, and that also applies to our domestic service industries - they are in the noncompetitive sphere, still too cheap.  Some foodstuffs like milk are subsidized, also some pharmaceutical products.''
 
 It had been an axiom of Communist practice in this part of the world in previous decades to maintain fixed prices for food and housing rents, even if it meant extremely large Government subsidies. Now Hungary is in the forefront of change in Eastern Europe, on a road that others may seek to follow.
 
 ''It appears we have passed a whole historical era,'' Mr. Marjai said of the pricing changes implemented last summer. ''People are still not accustomed to it. We keep explaining that a reduction of industrial production to 98 percent of last year is better for them, that behind this are qualitative changes, producing more under more rigid processes, reducing or liquidating uneconomic products. World prices mean that an enterprise sets the prices for its goods at internationally competitive levels. The unliquidated part is more productive.''
 
 Mr. Marjai said that the steady rise in the standard of living in Hungary over the past two decades, ''considering we are one of the poorest countries in natural resources and volume, is as good as possible.''
 
 Hungary's gross national product was listed in 1978 by Western economists as about $3,000 per capita, greater than that of neighboring Yugoslavia, but considerably less than that of East Germany or Czechoslovakia. But Hungary's new five-year plan, on which Mr. Marjai has just put the finishing touches, projects productivity increases of 3 percent a year, which is ahead of most Communist countries.


ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); CURRENCIES (90%); EXCHANGE RATES (90%); AGRICULTURAL OUTPUT (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (86%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); EXPORT TRADE (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); PRODUCER PRICES (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); CONSUMER PRICE INDEX (78%); PRICE MANAGEMENT (77%); INTERVIEWS (74%); PRICE CHANGES (73%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); AGRICULTURAL PRICES (70%); PRICE INCREASES (66%); EXPORT PRICES (66%); PRODUCT PRICING (66%); PRODUCTIVITY (61%); AGRICULTURE (61%); MODULAR & MANUFACTURED BUILDINGS (50%); 
