3S8G-CH50-000B-Y2BX


The New York Times


BIG WAGE INCREASES PREDICTED FOR 1981


19801209T000000Z


High wage settlements, pushed upward as a result of continued inflationary pressures on workers, can be expected in union contract bargaining in 1981, a group of labor experts forecast in a report made public yesterday.
 
 The Conference Board's Labor Outlook Panel predicted that union wage targets and settlements would rise above 10 percent in 1981 in response to a rise nationally of more than 12 percent in the cost of living. The Conference Board is a business-sponsored research group that reports on labor and industry trends.
 
 George B. Morris Jr., former vice president of industrial relations for the General Motors Corporation, who is now associated with a law firm, said he expected that bargaining would focus on bread-andbutter issues.
 
 He said the continuing high rate of inflation and interest rates would bring about pressures for higher up-front wage settlements, more cost of living adjustments protection and increased retirement benefits. Prospect of 'Continued Adversity'
 
 William W. Winpisinger, president of the International Association of Machinists, said that a recession and the prospect of ''continued adversity'' normally tended to dampen union militancy. But in the current situation, he said, the real wages and purchasing power of the work force have suffered ''drastic'' erosion.
 
 ''This alone is enough to set up a climate of confrontation in bargaining in 1981-1982,'' he said.  Contracts to be negotiated next year cover between two and three million workers, somewhat smaller than the number involved this year. Industries involved include airlines, coal, railroads, construction, aerospace, West Coast shipping, the United States Postal Service, and New York City newspapers.
 
 The eight panel members said wage and benefit increases in the first year of major contract settlements in 1981 were likely to range from 9.8 percent to 12 percent, with a median of 10.2 percent.  They said they expected the Consumer Price Index to increase 9 to 15 percent, with a median of 11.5 percent. They forecast an overall unemployment rate of 7 to 10 percent, with a median of 8 percent.  They said increases in labor costs per unit of output in manufacturing could be expected to range from 8 to 12 percent, with a median figure of 11 percent.1979 and 1980 Settlements
 
 Major settlements in the first nine months of this year had average first year wage increases of 9.7 percent compared with a 7.4 percent average wage adjustment negotiated in all of 1979, according to the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics. The panel, taking note of increased competitive pressure s on UnitedStates business and also of the election gains by conserva tives, suggested that the period ahead would be a ''time of turbu lence'' forunions. Some panel members warned that the failure of unio ns to adjust their strategies to changing competitive conditions could escalate unemployment and weaken labor organizations as an economic and political force in the 1980's.
 
 William H. Wynn, president of the United Food and Commercial Workers, said, however, that he saw no reason for a change in union policy toward wage bargaining.
 
 Other panel members were: Audrey Freedman, labor economist at The Conference Board; Robert Neylan, vice president of employee relations for Gould Inc.; Robert A. Georgine, president of the Building and Construction Trades Department, A.F.L.-C.I.O.; William V. Machaver, vice president of industrial relations and personnel of the Sun Chemical Corporation, and Arnold R. Weber, president of the University of Colorado.


WAGES & SALARIES (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); INFLATION (90%); LABOR UNIONS (90%); COST OF LIVING (90%); AVERAGE EARNINGS (78%); RECESSION (78%); LABOR SECTOR PERFORMANCE (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); COLLECTIVE BARGAINING (78%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (78%); LABOR FORCE (78%); TRENDS (78%); CONSUMER PRICE INDEX (78%); MACHINE TOOLS (75%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (73%); STATISTICS (71%); INTEREST RATES (69%); CONSTRUCTION (64%); POSTAL SERVICE (50%); 
