3S8G-CF90-000B-Y2GT


The New York Times


INCOMES KEEP PACE WITH PRICES


19801223T000000Z


Americans increased their spending and cut their savings last month, as personal incomes kept slightly ahead of inflation, the Commerce Department reported today.
 
 Economists said the trend indicated that consumers remained relatively confident and were finding ways to weather rising interest rates.
 
 The Commerce Department said personal income in November rose $24.9 billion, or 1.1 percent, to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of $2.26 trillion. That follows two consecutive monthly increases of 1.2 percent.
 
 Consumer prices, meanwhile, have been climbing about 1 percent a month. November's inflation figures are due tomorrow.  The department also reported that personal spending last month jumped $21.3 billion, or 1.2 percent, to an annual rate of $1.75 trillion. It had risen $28.6 billion, or 1.7 percent, in October.
 
 Most of November's increase was for services and nondurable items, not major products like automobiles and appliances, the Commerce Department said.
 
 Meanwhile, personal savings fell by 2.6 percent in November, to an annual rate of $104.2 billion. Savings had declined 8.4 percent in October, to a yearly pace of $107 billion.
 
 All these figures reflect major revisions that are undertaken by the Commerce Department every five years, officials explained. ''All estimates for the period beginning with 1968 were revised, and some have been revised for earlier years,'' officials said. Surprising News
 
 While trends remain essentially intact, dollar levels generally increased across the board. Moreover, the changes disclosed some surprising news, said Courtenay M. Slater, the department's chief economist.
 
 The nation's savings rate - the amount of disposable income that people save - proved higher than believed. With the revision, October's savings rate stood at 5.7 percent, instead of a previously reported 4.8 percent.
 
 Historically, economists consider a 6 percent level relatively healthy.  ''The revised data shows that the savings rate is closer to the historic norm than first thought, and that is a good sign for the economy,'' Mrs. Slater said.
 
 Nevertheless, with rising inflation, the recent trend has been a declining savings rate - 5.5 percent in November, compared with 5.7 percent in October, according to the Commerce Department.
 
 The report showed the following developments:
 
 - Wages and salaries last month increased $17.6 billion, or 1.3 percent, to an annual rate of $1.397 trillion. They had increased $23 billion, or 1.7 percent, in October due to sharp military and Federal pay rises.
 
 - Manufacturing payrolls went up $5.1 billion last month, compared with $5.6 billion in October - reflecting climbing employment, rising workweeks and higher hourly earnings.
 
 - Disposable income - what is left after taxes and other payments - rose $18.8 billion, or 1 percent, in November, matching October's increase. It stood at an annual rate of $1.897 trillion.
 
 - Each man, woman and child in the United States had an average personal income of $10,091 last month, compared with $9,998 in October.
 
 Robert Gough, vice president of Data Resources Inc., said that rising spending, although partly at the expense of savings, indicated the ''consumer is in no immediate danger of succumbing to high rates of inflation and interest rates.'' Resistance to High Rates
 
 However, this resistance to record high rates could make it even harder for the Federal Reserve to fight inflation through tight credit policies, he said.
 
 Sandra Shaber, senior economist at Chase Econometrics Associates, said that the stable unemployment rate since the summer had ''allayed many consumer anxieties,'' freeing them to spend heavily.
 
 Miss Shaber predicts a rise in the unemployment rate in the coming months. That would temper current spending and increase savings, she said.


COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS (91%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); INFLATION (90%); PERSONAL & FAMILY INCOME (90%); TRENDS (90%); STATISTICS (90%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); DISPOSABLE INCOME (89%); SAVINGS RATES (89%); PERSONAL FINANCE (78%); CONSUMER PRICE INDEX (78%); COMPANY EARNINGS (78%); INTEREST RATES (72%); 
